10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

-->

(https://www.aetna.com/)

Bone Growth Stimulators

Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins

Clinical Policy Bulletins

Number: 0343

Table Of Contents

Policy History

Policy

Applicable CPT / HCPCS / ICD-10 Codes

Last Review

Background

07/09/2025

References

Effective: 08/03/1999

Next Review: 04/09/2026

Review History

Deﬁnitions

Policy

Additional Information

Scope of Policy

Clinical Policy Bulletin

This Clinical Policy Bulletin addresses bone growth stimulators.

Notes

I. Medical Necessity

Aetna considers the following bone growth stimulators medically

necessary:

A. Ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulator

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

1/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

1. The use of an ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulator (e.g., an

ultrasonic accelerated fracture healing device) as durable

medical equipment (DME) to accelerate healing of fresh

fractures, fusions, or delayed unions at any of the following

high-risk sites:

i. Fresh closed or grade I* open, short oblique or short

spiral fractures, fusions, or delayed unions of the

shaft (diaphysis) of the tibia that are treated with

closed reduction and cast immobilization; or

ii. Fresh fractures, fusions, or delayed unions of the

scaphoid (carpal navicular); or

iii. Fresh fractures, fusions, or delayed unions of the 5th

metatarsal (Jones fracture); or

iv. Fresh fractures, fusions, or delayed unions of the

distal radius (Colles fracture) treated with closed

reduction and cast immobilization.

This system uses pulsed ultrasound to speed healing.

Fractures on these sites are diﬃcult to heal because of poor

vascular supply.

Grade I indicates that skin opening is 1 cm or less and

minimal muscle contusion.

2. An ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulator for non-unions, failed

arthrodesis, and congenital pseudarthrosis

(pseudoarthrosis) of the appendicular skeleton if there has

been no X-ray evidence of progression of healing for 3 or

more months despite appropriate fracture care, and the

following criteria are met:

a. Bone is non-infected; and

b. Bone is stable on both ends by means of cast or ﬁxation;

and

c. The two portions of the involved bone are separated by

less than 1 centimeter (cm);

B. Electrical stimulation

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

2/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

1. Direct current electrical bone-growth stimulators, as well as

inductive coupling or capacitive coupling non-invasive

electrical stimulators for any of the following non-spinal

indications:

a. Delayed unions of fractures or failed arthrodesis at high-

risk sites (e.g., open or segmental tibial fractures, carpal

navicular fractures, 5th metatarsal fractures, distal

radius, and sesamoid bones (ﬁbular sesamoid in the

foot); or

b. Non-unions, failed fusions, and congenital

pseudarthrosis where there is no X-ray evidence of

progression of healing for 3 or more months despite

appropriate fracture care;

And when the following criteria are met:

a. Bone is noninfected; and

b. Bone is stable on both ends by means of cast or ﬁxation;

and

c. The two portions of the involved bone are separated by

less than 1 centimeter (cm);

2. Direct current electrical bone-growth stimulators, as well as

inductive coupling or capacitive coupling non-invasive

electrical stimulators for any of the following spinal

indications:

a. A multiple level fusion entailing 3 or more vertebrae

(e.g., L3 to L5, L4 to S1, etc.), or

b. Grade II or worse spondylolisthesis, or

c. One or more failed fusions.

II. Experimental, Investigational, or Unproven

The following bone growth stimulators are considered

experimental, investigational, or unproven for the speciﬁed

indications because their eﬀectiveness for these indications has

not been established:

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

3/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

A. Ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulator

1. For fractures (including lumbar compression fracture, stress

fracture and avulsion fracture of the hip), failed fusions, or

non-unions of the axial skeleton (skull and vertebrae);

2. For all other indications, including the following (not an all-

inclusive list) because the medical literature does not

support its use for these indications:

a. Avascular necrosis of the femoral head;

b. Calcaneal apophysitis (Sever disease);

c. Charcot arthropathy;

d. Fractures with post-reduction displacement of more

than 50% (i.e., fractures in which the opposing broken

bone ends are out of alignment by more than one half of

the width of the bone);

e. Iliac apophysitis;

f. Pathological fractures due to malignancy (unless the

neoplasm is in remission);

g. Pre-operative use for fractures that require surgical

intervention or internal or external ﬁxation;

h. Stress fractures;

i. Talar dome lesion following osteochondral autograft

transfer system (OATS);

B. Electrical bone-growth stimulator

For the treatment of all other indications, including the

following (not an all-inclusive list) because of a lack of adequate

evidence for these conditions:

1. Avascular necrosis of the hip

2. Charcot arthropathy

3. Charcot foot

4. Comminuted toe fracture

5. Fractures of the scapula or pelvis

6. Loosened hip prosthesis

7. Loosened knee prosthesis

8. Lunate fractures

9. Odontoid fractures

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

4/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

10. Pre-operative use for fractures that require surgical

intervention or internal or external ﬁxation

11. Sacroiliac fusion

12. Spondylolysis (also known as pars inter-articularis fracture)

13. Stress fractures.

C. Semi-invasive bone growth stimulators

For all indications including treatment of orthopedic and

neurosurgical conditions (e.g., delayed unions, failed spinal

fusions, fracture non-unions, fresh fractures, and

pseudoarthroses) because of a lack of adequate evidence of

their eﬀectiveness;

III. Related Policies

CPB 0175 - High-Frequency Pulsed Electromagnetic Stimulation

(../100_199/0175.html)

CPT Codes / HCPCS Codes / ICD-10 Codes

Ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulator:

Code

Code Description

CPT codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Low intensity ultrasound stimulation to aid bone healing,

20979

noninvasive (nonoperative)

Application of a modality to one or more areas; ultrasound, each

97035

15 minutes

HCPCS codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Osteogenesis stimulator, low intensity ultrasound, non-invasive

E0760

ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Spondylolisthesis [acquired]

M43.10 -

M43.19

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

5/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Malunion of fracture

Numerous

options

Nonunion of fracture

Numerous

options

Q74.0 – Q74.9 Other congenital malformations of limbs [congenital

pseudarthrosis]

Congenital spondylolisthesis

Q76.2

Colles fracture

S52.531A –

S52.539S

Fracture of navicular (scaphoid) bone of wrist

S62.001A –

S62.036S

Fracture upper end of tibia

S82.101A –

S82.199S

Fracture of shaft of tibia

S82.201A –

S82.299S

Fracture of medial malleolus

S82.51xA –

S82.56xS

Other fracture of upper and lower end of fibula

S82.831A –

S82.839S

Bimalleolar fracture of lower leg

S82.841A –

S82.846S

Trimalleolar fracture of lower leg

S82.851A –

S82.856S

Pilon fracture of tibia

S82.871A –

S82.876S

Open or closed fracture of metatarsal bone(s) [Jones (5th

S92.301A -

metatarsal) fracture]

S92.356S

ICD-10 codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

C40.00 -

Malignant neoplasm of scapula and long bones of upper limb,

C40.32, C41.4

short bones of upper limb, pelvic bones, sacrum, and coccyx,

long bones of lower limb, or short bones of lower limb

Secondary malignant neoplasm of bone and bone marrow

C79.51 -

C79.52

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

6/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

M14.671 -

Charcot's joint, ankle and foot

M14.679,

M14.69

Stress fractures

M84.30xA –

M84.38xS

M84.40xA –

Pathologic fracture

M84.68xS,

M80.011A –

M80.88xS

Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of head and neck of femur

M87.051 -

M87.059,

M87.151 -

M81.159

M82.251 -

M87.256,

M87.351 -

M87.353

M87.851 -

M87.859,

M90.551 -

M90.559

Juvenile osteochondrosis of tarsus [calcaneal apophysitis

M92.60 -

(Sever disease)]

M92.62

Other specified juvenile osteochondrosis [iliac apophysitis]

M92.8

Juvenile osteochondrosis, unspecified [iliac apophysitis]

M92.9

Osteochondropathy, unspecified other [iliac apophysitis]

M93.98

Fracture of skull

S02.0xxA –

S02.92xS

S02.0xxA –

Fracture of vertebral column [with or without spinal cord injury]

S02.92xS,

S12.000A –

S12.9xxS,

S22.000A –

S22.089S

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

7/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Fracture of lumbar vertebra

S32.000A -

S32.050S

Avulsion fracture of ilium

S32.311A -

S32.316S

Avulsion fracture of ischium

S32.611A -

S32.616S

Electrical Stimulation:

CPT codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Electrical stimulation to aid bone healing; noninvasive (non-

20974

operative)

invasive (operative)

20975

HCPCS codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Osteogenesis stimulator, electrical, noninvasive, other than

E0747

spinal applications

Osteogenesis stimulator, electrical, noninvasive, spinal

E0748

applications

Osteogenesis stimulator, electrical, surgically implanted

E0749

ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Spondylolisthesis [acquired]

M43.10 -

M43.19

Fusion of spine

M43.20 -

M43.28

Malunion of fracture

Numerous

options

Nonunion of fracture

Numerous

options

Q74.0 - Q74.9 Other congenital malformations of limbs [congenital

pseudarthrosis]

Congenital spondylolisthesis

Q76.2

Fracture of navicular (scaphoid) bone of wrist

S62.001A –

S62.036S

Fracture upper end of tibia

S82.101A –

S82.199S

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

8/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Fracture of shaft of tibia

S82.201A –

S82.299S

Fracture of medial malleolus

S82.51xA –

S82.56xS

Other fracture of upper and lower end of fibula

S82.831A –

S82.839S

Bimalleolar fracture of lower leg

S82.841A –

S82.846S

Trimalleolar fracture of lower leg

S82.851A –

S82.856S

Pilon fracture of tibia

S82.871A –

S82.876S

Fracture of navicular (scaphoid), foot

S92.251A –

S92.256S

Open or closed fracture of metatarsal bone(s) [Jones (5th

S92.301A -

metatarsal) fracture]

S92.356S

Other fracture of foot, except ankle [Sesamoid bones fracture of

S92.811A -

foot]

S92.819S

ICD-10 codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Charcot's joint, ankle and foot

M14.671 -

M14.679

Sacroiliac fusion

M43.28

Stress fractures

M84.30xA –

M84.38xS

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

9/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of head and neck of femur

M87.051 -

M87.059,

M87.151 -

M81.159

M82.251 -

M87.256,

M87.351 -

M87.353

M87.851 -

M87.859,

M90.551 -

M90.559

Spondylolysis [lumbar region]

Q76.2

Fracture of second cervical vertebra [odontoid fractures]

S12.100A –

S12.131S

Fracture of acetabulum

S32.401A –

S32.599S

Fracture of scapula

S42.101A –

S42.199S

Fracture of lunate [semilunar]

S62.121A –

S62.126S

Mechanical loosening of prosthetic joint [hip and knee joint]

T84.032A –

T84.033S

Semi-Invasive Bone Growth Stimulators:

No specific code

ICD-10 codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB (not all inclusive):

Atypical femoral fracture

M84.750A –

M84.759S

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

10/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

S02.0xxA –

Fractures of skull, neck, trunk, upper limbs and lower limbs

S02.19xS,

[malunion and nonunion]

S12.00xA –

S12.9xxS,

S22.000A –

S22.9xxS,

S32.000A –

S32.9xxS,

S42.001A –

S42.9xxS,

S52.001A –

S52.92xS,

S62.001A –

S62.92xS,

S72.001A –

S72.92xS,

S82.001A –

S82.92xS,

S92.001A –

S92.919S

Background

Bone growth stimulation is utilized to promote bone healing in difficult to

heal fractures or fusions by applying electrical or ultrasonic current to the

fracture/fusion site.

An electrical osteogenesis stimulator is a device that provides electrical

stimulation to augment bone repair. Electrical stimulation can be applied

either from the outside of the body (noninvasive) or from the inside of the

body (invasive). A noninvasive electrical stimulator is characterized by an

external power source which is attached to a coil or electrodes placed on

the skin or on a cast or brace over a fracture or fusion site.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

11/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

An ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulator is a noninvasive device that emits

low intensity, pulsed ultrasound. The ultrasound signal is applied to the

skin surface at the fracture location via ultrasound conductive coupling

gel in order to stimulate fracture healing.

Ultrasonic Osteogenesis Stimulators for Fresh Fractures

Ultrasonic fracture healing utilizes a signal generator and a transducer,

which when placed over the fracture site on the skin, emits low intensity

ultrasound signals that are emitted directly to the fracture. Examples of

ultrasonic bone growth stimulators include, but may not be limited to, the

Exogen 4000+, Exogen 3000, Exogen 2000+ and Exogen 2000 (also

known as the SAFHS Model 2000 or the Exogen Pulsed Low-Intensity

Ultrasound Bone Healing System Model 2000).

When applied over a fracture site, an ultrasonic accelerated fracture

healing device produces an ultrasonic wave, which delivers mechanical

pressure to the bone tissue at the fracture site. Although the mechanism

by which the low-intensity pulsed ultrasound device accelerates bone

healing is uncertain, it is thought to promote bone formation in a manner

comparable to bone responses to mechanical stress.

In October 1994, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the

SAFHS, manufactured by Exogen, Inc. (West Caldwell, NJ), to accelerate

the healing of new bone fractures in the tibial diaphysis and Colles'

fractures of the distal radius in adults. The FDA approval of the device

was based in part on its review of 2 multi-center randomized controlled

trials of the device on tibial diaphyseal fractures and distal radius (Colles')

fractures.

SAFHS low-intensity pulsed ultrasound has been demonstrated to

significantly accelerate the time to clinical healing of fractures of the tibial

diaphysis. Tibial fractures are notorious for prolonged healing and a high

incidence of delayed union and nonunion. The average fresh

uncomplicated tibial fracture takes 4 months to heal, and a majority of

cases of nonunion involve the tibia. A study by Heckman, et al. (1994)

demonstrated the effectiveness of SAFHS low intensity pulsed ultrasound

in accelerating fracture healing in 96 patients with 97 closed or grade I

open fractures of the tibial shaft. Patients were randomly assigned to

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

12/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

treatment with either SAFHS or to a placebo device, and treatment with

SAFHS was begun within 7 days of injury. Thirteen fracture patients were

lost to follow-up, and 17 fracture patients were excluded because of

deviations from the study protocol (the latter group of patients were

included in an intention-to-treat analysis), so that 66 patients with 67

fractures remained in the study to its conclusion. Beginning 7 days after

fracture, patients received one 20-minute treatment each day either with

ultrasound or with the placebo device for up to 20 weeks. Two clinical

outcomes and two radiological outcomes were measured. The clinical

outcomes examined were time to clinical healing (defined as the time at

which the physician thought that, on clinical examination, the fracture was

stable and was not painful to palpation) and the time to discontinuation of

the cast (defined as the time at which the physician removed the cast).

The radiological outcomes included cortical bridging (the gradual

disappearance of interruption of cortex at the fracture site as a result of

callus formation) and endosteal healing (the gradual disappearance or

obliteration of the fracture line and its replacement by a zone of increased

density formed by endosteal callus). The time to radiographic healing was

defined as the time to bridging of all four cortices. A fifth outcome, time to

complete healing, was defined as the time to complete radiographic and

clinical healing. Given that clinical healing typically occurs before

radiographic healing, the time to complete healing was primarily a

reflection of the time to radiographic healing.

All patients were completely healed at the end of the study, regardless of

whether they were treated with low-intensity pulsed ultrasound

(Heckman, et al., 1994). There was a statistically significant reduction in

time to healing in the treatment group by each of the outcomes

measured. The reductions in time to healing measured clinically were

smaller than the reductions in time to healing measured radiographically.

The time to overall (clinical and radiographic) healing was 96 + 4.9 days

in the treatment group compared with 154 + 13.7 days in the placebo

group (p = 0.0001). In general, the magnitude of reductions in time to

healing tended to be greatest in tibial fracture patients which factors that

tend to prolong healing time. Older patients and women tend to have

greater times to healing than younger patients and men, and the

reduction in time to healing from SAFHS tended to be greater in older

patients and in women. Healing times tended to be greater with larger

fracture gaps, and spiral and oblique fractures tended to take longer to

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

13/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

heal than transverse fractures. The effect of SAFHS in reducing the time

to complete healing of tibial fractures tended to be greater where there

was a larger fracture gap, and also in patients with spiral or oblique

fractures. The greatest reductions in healing time occurred in patients

with oblique and spiral fractures who also had the largest fracture gaps.

The magnitude of the benefit of SAFHS was also affected by the location

of the fracture on the tibia, with the greatest reduction in fracture healing

time occurring in patients with fractures of the distal portion of the tibial

diaphysis. The magnitude of prereduction displacement also appeared to

have an effect on time to complete healing and on the amount of

reduction of fracture healing time with SAFHS. Patients with less than

20 percent prereduction displacement tended to have less time to a

healed fracture and less reduction in fracture healing time than patients

with prereduction displacement of 20 percent or more. Long-term follow-

up of trial participants was done at the request of the FDA to determine

whether all healed fractures in both groups remained healed at a

minimum of two years after the injury. Fifty-five patients (56 fractures) of

the 66 patients (67 fractures) who had been enrolled in the protocol were

contacted, and all of the 56 fractures were still healed up to four years

after fracture. The conclusions about the effectiveness of low-intensity

pulsed ultrasound on fracture healing from this study are limited to new

fractures of the tibial diaphysis that are closed or open grade I. Excluded

from the study were patients with severe fracture complications Also

excluded from the study were patients with pathological fractures

(fractures due to bone diseases or malignancy).

Although SAFHS low-intensity pulsed ultrasound has been demonstrated

to accelerate the time to radiologic healing of fresh closed Colles' (wrist)

fractures, it has not been shown to significantly reduce the time to clinical

healing of these fractures. Kristiansen, et al. (1997) examined the

effectiveness of SAFHS in Colles' fractures of the distal radius showed

significantly less time to radiographic healing in SAFHS-treated patients,

but was not able to detect any significant difference in time to clinical

healing. The study only included patients with closed Colles' fractures in

which the primary fracture line was predominantly transverse and

occurred within the distal 1.5 inches of the radius. The fracture was

required to be satisfactorily reduced, based upon radial length, radial

angle, and volar tilt. Eighty five fractures were entered into the study, with

40 fractures randomly assigned to the ultrasound treatment, and 45

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

14/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

fractures assigned to the placebo device. Patient's were treated with

ultrasound or the placebo device for 20 minutes each day for 10 weeks,

starting within 7 days of fracture. Three of these fractures were lost to

follow-up, and 21 were excluded because of lack of adherence to protocol

(the latter group were included in an intention-to-treat analysis), so that

61 fractures remained in the study to its conclusion. The outcomes

examined in this study were similar to those examined in the study of

tibial fractures described above: measures of clinical healing,

radiographic healing, and time to complete healing were reported. Colles'

fractures were considered clinically healed when the fracture site was

solid and free of tenderness and pain upon palpation. (In contrast to the

study of SAFHS and tibial fractures, the time to cast removal was not

reported in this study.) Time to endosteal healing and time to cortical

healing were measured. Colles' fractures were considered

radiographically healed when all cortices were bridged. Time to complete

healing, defined as the time to full clinical and radiographic healing, was

also measured. Because clinical healing of fractures usually occurs well

before radiographic healing, the time to complete (radiographic and

clinical) healing was primarily a factor of the time to radiographic

healing. Thus, the time to radiographic healing and the time to complete

healing were approximately equal.

Both patients treated with low-intensity pulsed ultrasound and patients

receiving placebo were healed by the end of the study; there was no

difference in the final healing rates between the treatment and control

groups (Kristiansen, et al., 1997). There was a statistically significant

difference time to radiographic healing between patients receiving active

treatment (60.2 + 3.5 days) and patients receiving placebo (97.9 + 5.2

days), as well as a statistically significant difference in time to complete

healing between actively treated patients (61 + 3.4 days) and placebo

recipients (98 + 5.2 days). There was no statistically significant difference

in time to clinical healing between patients receiving active treatment

(30 + 1.9 days) and patients receiving placebo (32 + 2.1 days). The

authors noted, however, that the measurement of clinical healing was

complicated by the subjectivity of the clinical assessment. Furthermore,

clinical healing was assessed when the initial cast was removed, and the

initial cast removal did not occur at the same time following fracture in

each patient. The failure to find a significant reduction in the time to

clinical healing of Colles' fractures with SAFHS, however, calls into

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

15/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

question whether the reductions in healing time reported in this study

were of clinical significance. First, the total healing time and reduction in

healing time with SAFHS of Colles' fractures were much smaller than that

of tibial fractures. This is because trabecular bone heals much more

rapidly than cortical bone due to its greater surface area, cellularity, and

vascularity. Among fractures of cortical bone, tibial fractures are

particularly likely to be slow-healing. Second, radiographic healing is an

outcome of questionable clinical relevance, given that the primary reason

to accelerate fracture healing is to reduce the duration of morbidity due to

pain and loss of function. There was evidence that the greatest

reductions in time to complete healing with SAFHS were achieved by

older patients and female patients -- patients who also tend to have

longer healing times. Actively treated patients age 50 or older healed 40

days sooner than placebo recipients of the same age, whereas actively

treated patients less than 50 years old healed only 29 days sooner than

their counterparts in the placebo group. Similarly, the reduction in time to

complete healing of Colles' fractures tended to be greater in women (40

days saved) than men (30 days saved). Excluded from the study were

patients with nonunions, pathologic fractures, or patients with fractures

requiring open reduction, skeletal fixation, or surgical intervention. Thus,

evidence of healing was limited to patients with fresh closed distal radius

(Colles') fractures that can be managed with closed reduction and cast

immobilization. At the request of the FDA, attempts were made to contact

all clinical trial participants two or more years after fracture to determine

whether their fractures were still healed. Over 92 percent of the patients

were contacted and all remained healed. Children were excluded from

both clinical trials because the effects of low intensity pulsed ultrasound

on the immature skeleton are unknown.

SAFHS is most likely to result in clinically significant benefits when

applied to fresh fractures with poor vascularity that are slow to heal and at

high risk of non-union. Tibial fractures that are open or segmental are

notorious for prolonged healing and a high incidence of delayed union

and non-union. Healing of femur fractures is also prolonged, and the

femur is the second most common site of fracture nonunion. However,

repair of femur fractures requires open surgery. Fractures of the scaphoid

(carpal navicular) and the fifth metatarsal (Jones fracture) are uncommon,

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

16/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

but when they occur, they are at high-risk of delayed union and non-

union. Hence, use of SAFHS may be particularly helpful in patients with

these fractures.

Literature from the manufacturer suggests that low intensity pulsed

ultrasound could be targeted to patients who are likely to have a slow

healing fractures, either because of fracture characteristics, comorbid

conditions, or because of age. Fractures involving trabecular bone tend to

heal much more rapidly than fractures of cortical bone, and comparison of

clinical trials of SAFHS in patients with fractures of the tibia (comprised

primarily of cortical bone) and Colles' fractures (involving primarily

trabecular bone) suggest that the reduction in healing time with SAFHS is

greatest in fractures involving cortical bone.

Smokers tend to have longer times to fracture healing. A subsequent

analysis of the SAFHS tibial fracture study showed that greater

reductions in fracture healing time were achieved in patients with a

history of smoking, with the greatest reductions in fracture healing time

occurring in current smokers (Cook et al, 1997).

There is evidence that patients receiving steroids or anticoagulants tend

to have prolonged fracture healing times. However, patients on these

medications were excluded from clinical trials of SAFHS, so that the

effect of SAFHS in reducing healing times in these patients is uncertain .

Patients with circulatory problems (e.g., vascular insufficiency,

thrombophlebitis) are more likely to experience prolonged fracture

healing, but patients with these problems were also excluded from study

participation.

Open fractures and severe fractures are susceptible to delayed

healing. However, patients with the most severe fracture complications

were excluded from study participation. Patients with pathologic fractures

(fractures occurring through diseased bone due to tumor, infection,

Paget's disease, etc.) are more likely to have fractures that are slow to

heal or fail to heal altogether. However, patients with pathologic fractures

were excluded from the clinical trials of SAFHS. Moreover, it is uncertain

whether SAFHS would significantly accelerate healing in patients with

pathologic fractures due to malignancy unless the underlying neoplasm is

treated.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

17/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Obese patients and patients with diabetes tend to have delayed fracture

healing. However, there are no clinical studies that demonstrate that

SAFHS results in a greater reduction in fracture healing time in these

patients compared to other patients.

There are no contraindications to the use of low intensity pulsed

ultrasound, and no known side effects. The intensity of ultrasound used

for fracture healing (30 milliwatts (mW) per centimeter squared (cm²)) is

at the same low level as diagnostic ultrasound (0.5 to 50 mW/ cm²).

Ultrasound of this intensity produces very little heat in tissue, in contrast

to high intensity ultrasound used for surgical (5 to 125 watts (W)/ cm²) or

therapeutic (0.2 to 3 W/ cm²) purposes.

SAFHS will not correct or alter post reduction aspects of a fracture, such

as displacement, angulation, or malalignment. It does not obviate the

need for open reduction and internal fixation in fractures where this is

indicated.

The safety and effectiveness of the use of SAFHS has not been

established for fractures with post-reduction displacement of more than

50% (i.e., fractures in which the opposing broken bone ends are out of

alignment by more than one half of the width of the bone).

Ultrasonic bone growth stimulation has also been studied for accelerating

healing of stress fractures. In a prospective, randomized, double-blind

clinical trial, Rue et al (2004) ascertained if pulsed ultrasound reduces

tibial stress fracture healing time. A total of 26 midshipmen (43 tibial

stress fractures) were randomized to receive pulsed ultrasound or

placebo treatment. Twenty-minute daily treatments continued until

patients were asymptomatic with signs of healing on plain radiographs.

The groups were not significantly different in demographics, delay from

symptom onset to diagnosis, missed treatment days, total number of

treatments, or time to return to duty. Findings of this study demonstrated

that pulsed ultrasound did not significantly reduce the healing time for

tibial stress fractures. Furthermore, Zura and colleagues (2007) surveyed

the attitudes of members of the Orthopaedic Trauma Association (OTA)

concerning the use and effectiveness of bone growth stimulators. A

questionnaire regarding bone growth stimulators was sent to the active

members of the OTA. Descriptive statistics was performed using

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

18/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

frequencies and percentages. All analyses were performed using Stata

for Linux, version 8.0 (Intercooled Stata, Stata Corporation; College

Station, TX). A response rate of 43 % was obtained. Respondents

indicated that they only occasionally used bone stimulators for the

treatment of acute fractures and stress fractures. A majority of

respondents have utilized stimulators for the treatment of delayed unions

and non-unions. The authors concluded that many members of the OTA

utilize bone stimulators for delayed unions and non-unions, but not

routinely for the treatment of acute fractures or stress fractures.

Watanaba and colleagues (2010) stated that low-intensity pulsed

ultrasound is a relatively new technique for the acceleration of fracture

healing in fresh fractures and non-unions. It has a frequency of 1.5 MHz,

a signal burst width of 200 micros, a signal repetition frequency of 1 kHz,

and an intensity of 30 mW/cm2. In 1994 and 1997, 2 milestone double-

blind randomized controlled trials revealed the benefits of pulsed

ultrasound for the acceleration of fracture healing in the tibia and radius.

They showed that pulsed ultrasound accelerated the fracture healing rate

from 24 % to 42 % for fresh fractures. Some literature, however, has

shown no positive effects. The beneficial effect of acceleration of fracture

healing by pulsed ultrasound is considered to be larger in the group of

patients or fractures with potentially negative factors for fracture healing.

The incidence of delayed union and non-union is 5 % to 10 % of all

fractures. For delayed union and non-union, the overall success rate

of pulsed ultrasound therapy is approximately 67 % (humerus), 90 %

(radius/radius-ulna), 82 % (femur), and 87 % (tibia/tibia-fibula). The

authors noted that pulsed ultrasound likely has the ability to enhance

maturation of the callus in distraction osteogenesis and reduce the

healing index. They concluded that the critical role of pulsed

ultrasound for fracture healing is still unknown because of the

heterogeneity of results in clinical trials for fresh fractures and the lack of

controlled trials for delayed unions and non-unions.

Ultrasound Osteogenesis Stimulators for Nonunions

SAFHS low-intensity pulsed ultrasound was approved by the FDA in

February 2000 for the treatment of established non-unions, excluding the

skull and vertebrae. The FDA approval of the device was based on a

review of retrospective studies of 79 patients with non-unions treated with

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

19/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

SAFHS. Patients with pathologic fractures due to malignancy were

excluded from these studies. Of the 74 completed cases, 86 % healed

both radiographically and clinically and 14 % were failures of SAFHS

treatment. The mean time to a healed fracture was 5½ months.

Other evidence of the effectiveness of SAFHS for non-unions include a

registry of prescription use of SAFHS for non-unions in the United States,

which showed a heal rate of 82 % of 429 completed cases, and a

retrospective study of non-unions which showed a heal rate of 90 % of 30

completed cases.

Medicare allows ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulators only if all of the

following criteria are met: (i) nonunion of a fracture documented by a

minimum of two sets of radiographs obtained prior to starting

treatment with the osteogenic stimulator, separated by a minimum of

90 days; and (ii) the fracture is not of the skull or vertebrae; and (iii)

the fracture is not tumor related. Medicare requires that each

radiograph set include multiple views of the fracture site accompanied by

a written interpretation by a physician stating that there has been no

clinically significant evidence of fracture healing between the two sets of

radiographs. Medicare considers not medically necessary use of an

ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulator with other noninvasive osteogenesis

stimulators.

Ultrasonic Osteogenesis Stimulator for the Treatment of Lumbar

Compression Fracture

An UpToDate review on “Osteoporotic thoracolumbar vertebral

compression fractures: Clinical manifestations and treatment” (Rosen and

Walega, 2021) does not mention osteogenesis stimulator / low-intensity

ultrasound as a management / therapeutic option.

Ultrasonic Osteogenesis Stimulator for the Treatment of Stress Fracture and Avulsion Fracture of the Hip

Stafford et al (2019) presented the findings of a case of an 18-year old

with a 2-year history of buttock pain who failed extensive treatment for a

perceived hamstring strain. Upon evaluation, he was diagnosed with an

ischial tuberosity nonunion avulsion fracture. The patient underwent

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

20/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

bone grafting via an ultrasound (US)-guided leukocyte rich platelet-rich

plasma (PRP) injection followed by the use of a bone stimulator to

enhance the bone healing. At 3 months, he was asymptomatic and had

radiographic evidence of excellent bone healing. He remained

asymptomatic at 1 year and had resumed full activities. The authors

concluded that this case report was the 1st in the literature to describe

the treatment of a chronic ischial tuberosity nonunion avulsion fracture

with the use of PRP as a bone graft.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Pelvic trauma: Initial evaluation

and management” (Fiechtl, 2021) does not mention bone growth

stimulator as a management / therapeutic option.

Electrical Stimulation

Electrical stimulation can be applied either from the outside of the body

(noninvasive) or from the inside of the body (invasive). Noninvasive

(external) electrical bone growth stimulators (BGS) are devices worn on

the outside of the skin. They utilize treatment coils situated externally

around the fracture or fusion site and an external power supply. There are

three types of noninvasive electrical bone growth stimulators:

Capacitive coupling (CC) devices use metal electrodes, which are

applied to the skin to deliver the current. An example of a CC

device includes, but may not be limited to, the EBI OrthoPak 2

Bone Growth Stimulator.

Pulsed electromagnetic ﬁeld (PEMF) devices use an externally

applied coil to deliver the current, which can be pulsed on and oﬀ.

Examples of PEMF devices include, but may not be limited to, the

EBI Bone Healing System, the Orthoﬁx Cervical-Stim, the Orthoﬁx

Physi-Stim, the Orthoﬁx Spinal-Stim and the SpinalPak II Spinal

Fusion Stimulator.

Combined magnetic ﬁeld (CMF) devices use an external coil system

with a combination of direct and alternating current to produce

both static and alternating magnetic ﬁelds. Examples of CMF

devices include, but may not be limited to, the OrthoLogic (OL)

1000 Bone Growth Stimulator and the SpinaLogic Bone Growth

Stimulator.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

21/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

The surgically implanted or invasive electrical BGS utilize direct current to

the nonhealing fracture or bone fusion site. Examples of invasive

(implantable) electrical bone growth stimulators include, but may not be

limited to, the EBI OsteoGen Bone Growth Stimulator, the OsteoGen Dual

Lead Bone Growth Stimulator, the OsteoGen-M Bone Growth Stimulator,

the SpF PLUS-Mini Spinal Fusion Stimulator, the SpF-XL IIb Spinal

Fusion Stimulator and the Zimmer Direct Current Bone Growth

Stimulator.

Electrical Stimulation for Spinal Fusion

Spinal fusion is a general term which describes the surgical results of a

procedure designed to eliminate motion across a spinal segment. All

fusions involve the placement of a bone graft across the spinal segment

with or without a wide variety of internal fixators and techniques for

postoperative immobilization.

There are 3 general indications for spinal fusion: (i) to restore the

integrity of the spine, to replace bone deﬁcits, i.e., in fracture, tumor,

infection; (ii) to maintain the correction of spinal deformity or prevent

the progression of deformity, i.e. scoliosis; and (iii) to produce an

arthrodesis to suppress painful instability. The correction of painful

instabilities probably the most common and controversial indication for

fusion. The controversy centers around the treatment of low back pain

and whether laminectomy and discectomy should be accompanied by a

fusion. This is in turn related to whether instability itself is contributing to

the low back pain or whether the surgical procedure, for example,

discectomy and laminectomy, will produce an iatrogenic instability.

Because of the potential for failed fusion, electrical stimulation techniques

have been investigated as a method to improve the chances for a

successful fusion.

Two general types of electrical stimulation devices are available for spinal

fusion. An implantable device (e.g., SpF-2) uses direct current to

stimulate osteogenesis. The implantable device consists of a battery

pack which provides direct current over four cathodes. The device is

implanted during the fusion procedure; the cathodes are implanted at the

fusion site while the battery pack is implanted just beneath the dorsal

fascia or in the soft tissue above the iliac crest. An external device (e.g.,

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

22/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Spinal Stim) uses pulsating electromagnetic energy to induce weak

electrical currents in the underlying tissue. The external electrical

stimulation device consists of the magnetic coils incorporated into a

corset like device which the patient wears 8 to 10 hours per day, usually

while sleeping. The external device can either be used immediately after

surgery, or only when fusion failure becomes apparent.

There have been several clinical studies on either device. In a

randomized prospective controlled trial of the implanted electrical

stimulation device in difficult spinal fusion patients, subjects were

randomized to undergo a spinal fusion procedure either with or without

simultaneous implantation of an electrical stimulation device. At 18

month post- surgery, successful fusion was achieved in 54 % of the

control group and 81 % of the treatment group (Kane, 1988).

In a randomized double blind prospective study of an external electrical

stimulation device, 195 patients were randomized to receive either a

functioning or nonfunctioning brace following surgery (Mooney, 1990). A

total of 40 % of patients were non-compliant. In those compliant patients

who received an active brace, the fusion success rate was 92.2 % versus

a success rate of 67.9 % of the compliant patients in the control group.

In a retrospective, case-controlled, pilot study, Welch and colleagues

(2004) examined the safety and effectiveness of an implantable direct

current bone growth stimulator (IDCBGS) as an adjunct to cervical

arthrodesis in patients at high risk for non-union after undergoing cervical

fusion in region from the occiput to C3. A total of 20 patients underwent

para-axial cervical arthrodesis for the correction of instability. All were at

high-risk for non-union due to advanced age, rheumatoid arthritis, prior

failed fusion attempts, infection, or immunosuppressive drug use. An

IDCBGS was used to augment the surgical procedure. The mean follow-

up period was 19 months, and 16 patients were available for follow-up.

Radiographical evidence of fusion was demonstrated in 15 of 16 patients

(94 %). After surgery, all patients demonstrated clinical stabilization, a

resolution of symptoms in combination with an improvement in

neurological status, or both. The mean elapsed time before fusion

occurred was 4.6 months. No neurological complications related to

cathode or generator placement were observed. The use of the

stimulator as an adjunct to instrument- or non-instrument-assisted

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

23/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

surgical fusion of the para-axial region in these high-risk patients

appeared both safe and effective. The authors concluded that further

investigation is needed to define the possible role and clinical utility of the

IDCBGS in selected patients requiring cervical fusion, particularly those

at high-risk for non-union.

Aetna's policy on electrical stimulation for spine fusion is supported by

current Medicare policy, which allows electrical stimulation for spine

fusion for the following indications:

(i) failed spinal fusion where a minimum of nine months has elapsed

since the last surgery; or (ii) following a multilevel spinal fusion

surgery; or (iii) following spinal fusion surgery where there is a history

of a previously failed spinal fusion at the same site. Medicare notes

that a multilevel spinal fusion is one which involves 3 or more

vertebrae (e.g., L3-L5, L4-S1, etc). Kaiser and colleagues (2014) noted

that the relationship between the formation of a solid arthrodesis and

electrical and electromagnetic energy is well-established; most of the

information on the topic, however, pertains to the healing of long bone

fractures. The use of both invasive and non-invasive means to supply

this energy and supplement spinal fusions has been investigated. Three

forms of electrical stimulation are routinely used: (i) direct current

stimulation (DCS), (ii) PEMF stimulation (PEMFS), and (iii) capacitive

coupled electrical stimulation (CCES). Only DCS requires the placement

of electrodes within the fusion substrate and is inserted at the time of

surgery. Since publication of the original guidelines, few studies have

investigated the use of bone growth stimulators. Based on the current

review, no conflict with the previous recommendations was generated.

The use of DCS is recommended as an option for patients younger than

60 years of age, since a positive effect on fusion has been observed.

The same, however, cannot be stated for patients over 60, because DCS

did not appear to have an impact on fusion rates in this population. No

study was reviewed that investigated the use of CCES or the routine use

of PEMFS. A single low-level study demonstrated a positive impact of

PEMFS on patients undergoing revision surgery for pseudarthrosis, but

this single study was insufficient to recommend for or against the use of

PEMFS in this patient population.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

24/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

PEMF for Cervical Fusion

Pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF) therapy has been studied as an

adjunct to cervical spinal fusion, with mixed evidence regarding its

efficacy. The most relevant high-quality evidence is a randomized,

controlled, prospective multicenter trial in patients undergoing anterior

cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) with risk factors for nonunion

(smoking, multilevel fusion) (Foley, et al., 2008). This study found that

PEMF significantly increased the fusion rate at 6 months postoperatively

(83.6% vs. 68.6%, p=0.0065), but the difference was not statistically

significant at 12 months (92.8% vs. 86.7%, p=0.11). No differences in

adverse events or clinical outcomes (pain, disability) were observed

between groups, indicating that PEMF is safe but may only accelerate,

rather than increase, ultimate fusion rates in this population.

Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of electrical stimulation modalities

(including PEMF) for spinal fusion generally suggest a modest increase in

fusion rates, but the quality of evidence is moderate and heterogeneity is

high. One meta-analysis found that electrical stimulation increased the

odds of successful fusion (OR 2.53, 95% CI 1.86–3.43), but did not

identify a significant difference between stimulation types or by spinal

region (Akhter, et al., 2020; Luo, et al., 2024). Another meta-analysis

focusing on noninvasive electrical stimulation found no significant

difference in fusion rates for PEMF compared to control, and highlighted

the high risk of bias and limited number of studies (Matur, et al., 2022).

According to OrthoFix, the CervicalStim device is the only bone growth

stimulation therapy approved by the (FDA as a non-invasive, adjunctive

therapeutic option for cervical fusion in patients at high-risk for non-

fusion. The device uses a pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF) to induce

a low-level electrical field at the fusion site, which stimulates bone healing

at a molecular, cellular, and tissue level. With an overall clinical success

rate of 84 %, the CervicalStim device increases fusion success

significantly by 22 % when used adjunctively to surgery.

Mackenzie and Veninga (2004) presented a case report of anterior

cervical fusion non-union that was successfully treated with PEMF

stimulation. In this case, a C6 to C7 non-union was identified clinically

and radiographically 1 year after surgery. Imaging revealed non-union

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

25/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

with partial resorption of the bone graft compared with imaging studies

performed 8 months earlier. The patient wore a PEMF stimulation device

for 3 hours/day for 10 months. After 3 months of treatment, the patient's

symptoms were resolved. X-rays obtained after 15 weeks of stimulation

showed improvement in bone fusion, and X-rays obtained at 31 weeks

after stimulation showed even bone density around the C7 screws. The

patient remained symptom-free 13 months after the termination of PEMF

stimulation at last assessment. The authors concluded that PEMF

stimulation demonstrated its clinical potential in healing established non-

union of anterior cervical spine fusion. Its use is non-invasive and can be

considered an alternative to surgical intervention in selected patients.

Foley et al (2008) stated that multi-level fusions, the use of allograft bone,

and smoking have been associated with an increased risk of non-union

after anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) procedures; PEMF

stimulation has been shown to increase arthrodesis rates after lumbar

spine fusion surgery, however, there are minimal data concerning the

effect of PEMF stimulation on cervical spine fusion. In a prospective,

multi-center, randomized controlled trial (RCT), these researchers

examined the safety and efficacy of PEMF stimulation as an adjunct to

arthrodesis after ACDF in patients with potential risk factors for nonunion.

A total of 323 patients with radiographic evidence (computed tomography-

myelogram [CT-myelo] or magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) of a

compressed cervical nerve root and symptomatic radiculopathy

appropriate to the compressed root that had failed to respond to non-

operative management were enrolled in the study. Subjects were either

smokers (more than 1 pack per day) and/or were undergoing multi-level

fusions. All patients underwent ACDF using the Smith-Robinson

technique. Allograft bone and an anterior cervical plate were used in all

cases. Measurements were obtained pre-operatively and at each post-

operative interval and included neurologic assessment, visual analog

scale (VAS) scores for shoulder/arm pain at rest and with activity, SF-12

scores, the neck disability index (NDI), and radiographs (antero-posterior,

lateral, and flexion-extension views). Two orthopedic surgeons not

otherwise affiliated with the study and blinded to treatment group

evaluated the radiographs, as did a blinded radiologist. Adverse events

(AEs) were reported by all patients throughout the study to determine

device safety. Patients were randomly assigned to 1 of 2 groups: those

receiving PEMF stimulation after surgery (PEMF group, 163 patients) and

those not receiving PEMF stimulation (control group, 160 patients). Post-

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

26/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

operative care was otherwise identical. Follow-up was carried out at 1, 2,

3, 6, and 12 months post-operatively. The PEMF and control groups

were comparable with regard to age, gender, race, past medical history,

smoking status, and litigation status. Both groups were also comparable

in terms of baseline diagnosis (herniated disc, spondylosis, or both) and

number of levels operated (1, 2, 3, or 4). At 6 months post-operatively,

the PEMF group had a significantly higher fusion rate than the control

group (83.6 % versus 68.6 %, p = 0.0065). At 12 months after surgery,

the stimulated group had a fusion rate of 92.8 % compared with 86.7 %

for the control group (p = 0.1129). There were no significant differences

between the PEMF and control groups with regard to VAS pain scores,

NDI, or SF-12 scores at 6 or 12 months. No significant differences were

found in the incidence of AEs in the groups. The authors concluded that

this was the 1st RCT that examined the effects of PEMF stimulation on

cervical spine fusion. PEMF stimulation significantly improved the fusion

rate at 6 months post-operatively in patients undergoing ACDF with an

allograft and an anterior cervical plate, the eligibility criteria being patients

who were smokers or had undergone multi-level cervical fusion. At 12

months post-operatively, however, the fusion rate for PEMF patients was

not significantly different from that of the control group. There were no

differences in the incidence of AEs in the 2 groups, indicating that the use

of PEMF stimulation was safe in this clinical setting.

Coric et al (2018) noted that PEMF stimulation was evaluated after ACDF

procedures in a RCT performed for FDA approval. PEMF significantly

increased fusion rates at 6 months, but 12-month fusion outcomes for

subjects at elevated risk for pseudarthrosis were not thoroughly reported.

The objective of the current study was to examine the effect of PEMF

treatment on subjects at increased risk for pseudarthrosis after ACDF

procedures. Two evaluations were performed that compared fusion rates

between PEMF stimulation and a historical control (160 subjects) from

the FDA investigational device exemption (IDE) study: a post-hoc (PH)

analysis of high-risk subjects from the FDA study (PH PEMF); and a

multi-center, open-label (OL) study consisting of 274 subjects treated with

PEMF (OL PEMF). Fisher's exact test and multi-variate logistic

regression was used to compare fusion rates between PEMF-treated

subjects and historical controls. In separate comparisons of PH PEMF

and OL PEMF groups to the historical control group, PEMF treatment

significantly (p < 0.05, Fisher's exact test) increased the fusion rate at 6

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

27/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

and 12 months for certain high-risk subjects who had at least 1 clinical

risk factor of being elderly, a nicotine user, osteoporotic, or diabetic; and

for those with at least 1 clinical risk factor and who received at least a 2-

or 3-level arthrodesis. The authors concluded that adjunctive PEMF

treatment can be recommended for patients who are at high risk for

pseudarthrosis. They stated that a limitation of this trial was that it was

an open-label study that compared results with a historical control rather

than a randomized concurrent control. Moreover, these researchers

stated that appropriately powered studies are needed to confirm these

findings and examine the effect of PEMF on other patient populations.

They stated that PEMF treatment may be a valuable adjunct for

augmenting cervical spinal fusion rate in some cases with high-risk

subjects.

There are no major U.S. society guidelines specifically recommending

routine use of PEMF for cervical spinal fusion. In summary, PEMF may

accelerate early fusion in high-risk cervical fusion patients, but does not

significantly improve long-term fusion rates or clinical outcomes, and

routine use is not currently supported by strong consensus (Akhter, et al.,

2020; Luo, et al., 2024; Matur, et al., 2022).

Electrical Stimulation for Nonunion

In nonunion, or interrupted bone healing, the normal process of

calcification fails to take place. The fracture gap remains occupied by

cartilage and/or fibrous tissue and vascular penetration cannot proceed.

Factors predisposing to nonunion include infection, extensive

comminution, inadequate blood supply, a large fracture gap, damage to

surrounding muscles, and torsional or bending stresses.

Under a definition adopted by the FDA, a nonunion is established when at

least 9 months have elapsed since injury and the fracture site shows no

visibly progressive signs of healing for a minimum of three months.

Others have suggested that nonunion may be suspected as early as 3

months after fracture if fracture healing has failed to progress during that

time. It has been estimated that approximately 5 % of all long bone

fractures will result in nonunion.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

28/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Electrical stimulation devices use low-energy electromagnetic fields to

promote healing by creating weak electrical currents across the fracture

site. Weak electrical currents have been found to stimulate bone

formation and calcification. Physicians are not certain why it works, but

many speculate that the currents stimulate osteocytes (bone cells) and

may change the structure of the cell wall, enhancing bone union.

In 1979, the FDA approved electrical stimulation therapy devices for

treatment of nonunion, congenital pseudarthrosis, and failed fusion. A

number of prospective studies, including controlled clinical trials, have

demonstrated the effectiveness of electrical stimulation in nonunions of

long bones. These studies have primarily examined the effectiveness of

electrical stimulation therapy in the treatment of nonunions of the tibia

and femur. The studies have defined healing endpoints both

radiographically (as evidenced by cortical bridging on x-ray) and clinically

(no pain or motion at fracture site). There is evidence that electrical

stimulation therapy is also effective in healing nonunions of other bones

of the appendicular skeleton.

Electrical stimulation therapy has not, however, been adequately

evaluated for treatment of nonunions of the flat bones, such as the pelvis,

scapula, and skull. Nor has electrical stimulation therapy been well

evaluated for treatment of fractures of the ribs or sternum.

Electrical stimulation has been used as an adjunct or alternative to bone

graft surgery in the treatment of nonunions. In bone graft surgery, a

section of bone taken from another skeletal site is used to bridge the

ununited gap. The major advantage of non-invasive electrical stimulation

over bone graft surgery is that it minimizes the risk of infection and avoids

the trauma of surgery. Electrical stimulation therapy has also been

shown to be an alternative to bone graft surgery in the conservative

management of congenital pseudarthrosis, the absence at birth of the

mid-portion of bone, and has been approved by the FDA for that purpose.

Three types of electrical stimulators were approved by the FDA in 1979

for treatment of nonunions and congenital pseudarthrosis: (i) invasive, (ii)

semi-invasive, and (iii) non-invasive. An invasive electrical stimulator

that uses constant direct current is implanted at the nonunion site. The

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

29/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

major advantage of implantation is that the electrical therapy is provided

constantly without the patient having to take an active role, so that

compliance is not an issue. The major disadvantage is that it requires 2

operations, one to implant the electrical device and one to remove the

device.

A semi-invasive system which uses percutaneous cathodes that provide

constant direct current is not currently in production.

Non-invasive electrical stimulator systems use inductive coupling or

capacitive coupling. With inductive coupling, pulsed electromagnetic

fields (PEMFs) are delivered by a pair of external magnetic coils placed

parallel to each other on top of the cast at the nonunion site. Treatment

times vary from 10 to 16 hours per day. Because precise placement of

the coils is necessary, the patient must remain relatively immobile during

treatment.

With capacitive coupling, 2 electrodes are applied to the skin through

windows cut through the cast, and are placed on either side of the

nonunion site. Because the system comes with a portable battery pack

and no precise placement of the electrodes is necessary, the patient can

remain relatively mobile.

Available evidence suggests that each of these systems gives

comparable success rates of 80 to 90 % in properly selected patients.

There are no known side effects to treatment with electrical stimulation.

According to the manufacturer's website, ActaStim is a non-invasive,

wearable capacitive coupling BGS designed to enhance spinal fusion.

Pre-clinical studies suggested that applying electrical stimulation (ES)

could aid the body in recruiting and using calcium ions to promote bone

growth (Theragen, 2025; Brighton, et al., 2001). The capacitive coupling

electrical signal ActaStim-S delivered to the fusion site helps supposedly

would mimic this natural process by opening cell membrane channels

that allow calcium ions to enter resulting in up-regulation of bone cell

proliferation, which is needed in both growth and repair. There is no

reliable evidence in peer-reviewed medical journals that the ActaStim

System brand is superior to other brands of capacitive coupling electrical

stimulation devices for enhancement of spinal fusion.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

30/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

More recently, the FDA approved the OrthoLogic 1000, a non-invasive

electrical stimulation device, for the treatment of nonunions (OrthoLogic

Corp., Phoenix, AZ). The OrthoLogic differs from standard non-invasive

electrical stimulation therapy in that it uses both static and pulsating

magnetic fields. In addition, the OrthoLogic uses magnetic fields that are

of lower energy (peak amplitude 400 milligauss) than standard PEMFs

(peak amplitude greater than 20 gauss). The chief advantage of the

OrthoLogic device is that it needs to be worn only 30 mins per day,

compared to 10 hrs per day with standard pulsed electromagnetic field

therapy.

In nonunions and congenital pseudarthrosis treated with electrical

stimulation therapy, progression of healing should be monitored both

clinically and radiologically. On x-ray, progression of healing is evidenced

by the appearance of consolidated bone stress lines gradually bridging

the fracture gap until continuity of the cortices occurs. When cortical

continuity is established and no motion exists at the treatment site, pulsed

electromagnetic field therapy may be discontinued, generally within 3 to 6

months, and rarely more than 9 months after electrical stimulation therapy

is initiated.

Electrical stimulation devices may be used in fractures where fixation

devices, such as rods or pins, are already in place, if the fixation devices

are non-magnetic.

Electrical stimulation therapy is effective in uniting previously open

fractures as well as closed fractures. Electrical stimulation therapy has

also been found to be effective in healing nonunions that have persisted

for many years. Surgical intervention is necessary before electrical

stimulation therapy where there is malalignment of the fractured bone.

Electrical stimulation therapy is generally not indicated where the fracture

gaps are greater than 1 centimeter or where they are greater than half the

diameter of the bone at the level of the nonunion. This is because larger

gaps do not contain enough responsive osteocytes to form bone when

stimulated by electricity.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

31/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Electrical stimulation therapy is also generally not indicated where there

is a synovial pseudarthrosis, or ''false joint'' -- a nonunion that has

developed a membrane-lined fluid-filled cavity between the fracture

fragments. Poor results with electrical therapy occur unless the lining of

the false joint is removed. Nonunions with a large gap or synovial

pseudarthrosis are thought to be better treated with bone grafting and

internal fixation before electrical stimulation.

Electrical stimulation therapy is also contraindicated in persons with

pacemakers.

The effects of electrical stimulation therapy on epiphyseal growth plates

are not known, so that use of electrical stimulation therapy in children,

who lack skeletal maturity, should be closely monitored.

Aetna's policy on non-spinal electrical stimulation is supported by

Medicare policy, which allows non-spinal electrical stimulation for the

following indications: (i) nonunion of a long bone fracture, deﬁned as

radiographic evidence that fracture healing has ceased for three or

more months prior to starting treatment with the osteogenesis

stimulator; or (ii) failed fusion of a joint other than in the spine where

a minimum of nine months has elapsed since the last surgery; or

congenital pseudarthrosis. Medicare requires that nonunion of a long

bone fracture be documented by a minimum of two sets of radiographs

obtained prior to starting treatment with the osteogenesis stimulator,

separated by a minimum of 90 days, each including multiple views of the

fracture site, and with a written interpretation by a physician stating that

there has been no clinically significant evidence of fracture healing

between the two sets of radiographs. Medicare policy states that a long

bone is limited to a clavicle, humerus, radius, ulna, femur, tibia, fibula,

metacarpal, or metatarsal.

A decision memorandum from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid

Services reviewed the evidence for electrical stimulation for fracture

healing and concluded: "Fracture nonunion is considered to exist only

when serial radiographs have confirmed that fracture healing has ceased

for three or more months prior to starting treatment with the electrical

osteogenic stimulator. Serial radiographs must include a minimum of two

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

32/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

sets of radiographs, each including multiple views of the fracture site,

separated by a minimum of 90 days." The CMS decision memorandum

(CMS, 1999) concluded that the quality and quantity of the evidence is

not enough for CMS to make a positive determination on expanding

coverage of electrical bone growth stimulators to nonunions other than for

long bones.

Simonis et al (2003) reported on a prospective, randomized, double-

blind study of the effectiveness of electyrical stimulation in tibial

nonuions. The study included 34 consecutive patients with a tibial non-

union met that met criteria for study inclusion. Each patient had an

oblique fibular osteotomy, followed by a unilateral external fixator.

Subjects were then randomly allocated one of two groups: group 1, the

active group, received electrical stimulation from an active device; group

2, the control group, had an identical device but without any current

passing through the active coils. Subjects were then followed up for 6

months and evaluated clinically and radiologically for bony union. The

investigators noted that there was a chance imbalance in

smoking between the 2 groups. The union rate in the subgroup that

smoked was 75 %(6/8) in the active group as compared to 46 %(6/13) in

the control group. Overall 24 out of the 34 patients progressed to union.

The investigators reported a statistically significant positive association

between tibial union and electrical stimulation (odds ratio 8, 95 % CI: 1.5

to 41, p = 0.02). Out of 18, 16 (89 %) in the active group showed bony

union as compared to 8/16 (50 %) in the control group. However, when

the overall result was adjusted for smoking, the association was weaker

and not statistically significant (odds ratio 5.4, 95 % CI: 0.85 to 34, p =

0.07). The authors noted, however, that electrical stimulation in both

smokers and non-smokers produced a higher rate of union than in

the control group.

Electrical stimulation has been investigated as a treatment for Charcot

arthropathy. Hockenbury and associates (2007) reviewed the results of

arthrodesis of the Charcot hindfoot when an implantable bone growth

stimulator was added to the procedure. Arthrodesis of the Charcot

hindfoot has a high non-union and complication rate. A total of 10

patients (aged 50 to 69 years) with Charcot neuroarthropathy of the

ankle, hindfoot, or both had arthrodesis with use of rigid internal fixation

and an implantable bone growth stimulator were included in the study.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

33/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

There were 6 tibio-talo-calcaneal, 2 pantalar, and 2 tibio-calcaneal

arthrodeses. An intra-medullary nail was used in 9 patients and a blade

plate was used in 1 patient. All but 1 patient was diabetic. Four of the 10

patients had pre-operative osteomyelitis or post-operative infection.

Another patient had purulent drainage, although cultures were negative.

Four patients had a pre-operative ulceration. Five patients had a 2-stage

procedure for debridement of infected bone, removal of hardware, and

placement of antibiotic beads. Autogenous bone graft from the distal

fibula or proximal tibia was used in all patients. One patient with a pre-

operative osteomyelitis developed a stable ankle pseudarthrosis. The

other 9 patients fused at an average of 3.7 months after surgery for a

fusion rate of 90 %. There were 2 major complications and 8 minor

complications. There were no amputations. All patients were ambulatory

in a double upright brace or shoes for diabetic patients and were free of

ulceration at the time of follow-up. Average American Orthopaedic Foot

and Ankle Society (AOFAS) Ankle-Hindfoot score improved from 21 pre-

operatively to 59 post-operatively. The authors concluded that the

adjunctive use of an implantable bone growth stimulator in conjunction

with rigid internal fixation, autogenous bone grafting, and sound operative

technique may enhance the outcome and fusion rate in patients

undergoing arthrodesis for Charcot neuroarthropathy of the ankle and

hindfoot. The findings of this study need to be validated by well-designed

studies.

Hanft et al (1998) evaluated the effectiveness of OrthoLogic

combined magnetic field (CMF) bone growth stimulation in the treatment

of acute, phase 1, Charcot neuroarthopathy; 31 subjects were studied.

Initially 10 controls and 11 study patients were examined. When the

initial results were analyzed, 10 additional study patients were added.

The result was a statistically significant reduction in time to consolidation,

23.8 weeks for the control versus 11 weeks for the study group. The

authors also reported that there was less destruction of the bony

architecture in the study group as compared to the control. A systematic

evidence review of treatments for Charcot foot (Smith et al, 2007)

commented on the study by Hanft et a., stating that the findings from the

preliminary trial may be biased arising from the small sample size,

selection bias and awareness to group allocation by subjects owing to a

lack of blinding.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

34/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Perlman et al (1999) reported on a reviews of charts for a series of 88

ankle fusions at a single institution. A total of 67 of these had adequate

follow-up for evaluation for union of the fusion, including adequate

records or x-rays; 19 of 67 ankle fusions progressed to nonunion (28 %).

The authors reported a trend toward increased risk of nonunions

in patients who were smokers, drank alcohol, had diabetes, had a

psychiatric disorder, or used illegal drugs. However, statistical

significance was not achieved for any one of these factors. Other

evidence for use of electrical stimulation for Charcot joint consists of case

reports (Bier et al, 1987).

Bigliani and colleagues (1983) reported on treatment with pulsing

electromagnetic fields as an adjunct in a series 20 patients who had had

a knee fusions after failure of a total joint replacement at a single

institution; 18 had had an infected arthroplasty; 1, mechanical loosening;

and 1, recurrent dislocation. Arthrodesis had been attempted 25 times in

these 20 patients prior to application of the coils. These procedures

included the use of 22 external fixation frames, 1 compression plate, 1

intramedullary rod, and 1 cylinder cast. Two groups of patients were

identified: those with non-union and those with delayed union. Fourteen

patients began treatment 6 months or more after arthrodesis and were

considered to have a nonunion. The other 6 patients started treatment

less than 6 months after attempted arthrodesis because there was no

evidence of progression toward union. They were considered to have

delayed union. In 17 of the 20 patients, a clinically solid arthrodesis

with x-ray evidence of bone-bridging was achieved. The average time to

union after coil therapy was started was 5.8 months, with a range of 3 to

12 months. The authors stated that the patients who started coil

treatment earlier after arthrodesis showed a tendency to heal faster. The

authors stated that three patients who had failures were the only ones

who did not adhere to the protocol, and all three were in the nonunion

group. They stated that all patients with a solid arthrodesis were free of

pain and able to walk at the time of follow-up, 9 to 31 months after the

completion of treatment. Limitations of this study included the small size,

retrospective nature, and lack of a comparison group.

There is little evidence to support electrical stimulation for lumbar

spondylolysis (also known as pars inter-articularis fracture). According to

eMedicine (Malanga et al, 2009), "The use of external electrical

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

35/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

stimulation for the healing of spondylolysis has been reported in 2 cases

in the literature. Electrical stimulation has been used to heal fractures in

all areas of the body. Although the literature supports the efficacy of

electrical stimulation in healing fractures, the use of electrical stimulation

for healing of spondylosis is not well studied and generally not

necessary".

UpToDate reviews on "Overview of stress fractures" (deWeber, 2012)

and "Stress fractures of the metatarsal shaft" (Clugston and Hatch, 2012)

do not mention the use of bone growth stimulator for the management of

patients with stress fractures.

Kennedy et al (1993) carried out a double-blind trial of pulsed

electromagnetic fields (PEMFs) for loosened cemented hip prostheses.

Of the 40 patients who enrolled, 37 met entry criteria and were available

for analysis. All patients completed 6 months of treatment (either active

or control units). Success was determined clinically by a Harris hip score

of greater than or equal to 80 points (or an increase of 10 points if initially

greater than or equal to 70 points). Ten of the 19 active units were

successes (53 %), whereas 2 of the 18 controls (11 %) exhibited a

placebo effect, a statistically significant and clinically relevant result. A 60

% relapse rate among the active successes was seen at 14 months post-

stimulation, and despite maintenance therapy of 1 hour/day, the relapse

rate increased to 90 % at 3 years. The authors concluded that these

findings suggested that for loosened cemented hip prostheses, use of

PEMFs is a treatment option only to delay revision hip surgery. The main

drawback of this study was its small sample size.

Konrad et al (1996) noted that aseptic loosening is the most common

problem of hip arthroplasties, limiting its long term success. These

investigators reported a study of PEMF treatment in 24 patients with this

complication. At the end of treatment, 6 months and 1 year later, pain

and hip movements improved significantly with the exception of flexion

and extension. There was significant improvement in both isotope scans

and ultrasonography, but not in plain X-ray. The authors concluded that

the decreased pain and improved function suggested that PEMF is

effective in improving symptoms of patients with loosened hip

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

36/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

replacement. No improvement, however, can be expected in patients

with severe pain due to gross loosening. The main drawbacks of this

study were its small sample size and short follow-up.

Semi-Invasive Bone Growth Stimulators

Semi-invasive direct current stimulation devices entail implantation of

induction wires, but the power-pack is worn externally. The cable

connecting the two passes through the skin, requiring careful attention to

prevent infection. To date, no semi-invasive electrical bone growth

stimulator devices have been approved or cleared by the FDA for clinical

uses.

Electrical Bone-Growth Stimulators for Comminuted Toe Fracture

Kohata and colleagues (2013) stated that the effectiveness of an

alternating current (AC) stimulation in prevention of bone deformity for

comminuted intra-articular fracture of distal radius were verified by

comparing post-operative results treated with a wrist-bridging external

fixator combined with or without an AC stimulator (EF and NEF,

respectively), and a palmar locking plate (LP). This study evaluated 92

cases of type C2 and 60 cases of type C3 distal radius fractures, as

classified by the Association for Osteosynthesis. A total of 55 and 24

cases were treated with EF and NEF, respectively; and 73 cases were

treated with LP. Callus appeared 27.5 ± 4.6 days post-operatively and

the external skeletal fixation period was significantly shorter in the EF

group than in the NEF group. The decrease in radial length was

significantly lower in the EF group when compared to the LP group.

There were no significant differences among the groups for the other

radiographic and functional parameters. The authors concluded that AC

stimulation combined to the external fixation may be a promising method

to prevent post-operative deformity in the severely comminuted intra-

articular fractures by accelerating callus maturation and facilitating new

bone bridging across the gap of fracture site.

An UpToDate review on “General principles of definitive fracture

management” (Beutler and Titus, 2019) stated that “Several non-

pharmacologic interventions have been used to aid fracture healing.

Among these are electromagnetic stimulation (“bone stimulators”) and

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

37/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

ultrasound. Electromagnetic stimulation is used most often to hasten

healing after internal fixation or bone grafting that has been performed for

fractures that failed to heal with standard treatment (i.e., non-unions).

Electromagnetic bone stimulation is often used to augment a trial of

conservative therapy in atypical or stress fractures that would otherwise

require surgery, and limited evidence suggests that these interventions

are effective”.

Pulsed Electromagnetic Fields (PEMF) Stimulation for Enhancement

of Spinal Fusion

In a prospective, randomized, double-blind study Mooney (1990)

examined the effectiveness of PEMF for interbody lumbar fusions (n =

195 subjects). There were 98 subjects in the active group and 97

subjects in the placebo group. A brace containing equipment to induce

an EMF was applied to patients undergoing interbody fusion in the active

group, and a sham brace was used in the control group. In the active

group there was a 92 % success rate, while the control group had a 65 %

success rate (p > 0.005); thus, the authors concluded that the

effectiveness of bone graft stimulation with the device was established.

Goodwin et al (1999) noted that previous studies have established the

effectiveness of direct current (DC) and EMF stimulation as adjuncts for

some forms of spinal fusion. None of the previous placebo-controlled

studies on external bone stimulation included posterolateral fusion

techniques, and most were conducted with prior generations of internal

fixation hard-ware. In a prospective, randomized, double-blind study,

these investigators examined the effect of non-invasive capacitively

coupled ES (CC-ES) on the success rate of lumbar spine fusion surgery,

and compared active with placebo stimulators as adjuncts to

contemporary fusion techniques. This trial was carried out by 28 U.S.

surgeons. Patients with a primary diagnosis of degenerative disc disease

(DDD) with or without other degenerative changes were selected. The

study protocol defined success as a clinical outcome rated as excellent or

good and a fusion documented as solid by both the investigator and the

blinded independent radiologist. Disagreements on radiographic success

were resolved by a 2nd blinded independent reviewer. For the 179

patients who completed treatment and evaluation, the overall protocol

success rate (both clinical and radiographic results rated as successes)

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

38/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

was 84.7 % for the active patients and 64.9 % for the placebo patients.

This difference was highly significant according to the Yates corrected

Chi-square test (p = 0.0043). Best improvements in patient outcomes (20

% or greater success rate) occurred when active stimulation was used in

conjunction with posterolateral fusion (p = 0.006) and when internal

fixation also was incorporated (p = 0.013). The findings of this study was

consistent in that active stimulation improved results for each

stratification, although some strata had insufficient numbers of patients

for the results to have statistical significance. Improved success rates

when CC-ES was added to internal fixation were hypothesized to result

from overcoming the biochemical effects of stress shielding. The authors

concluded that CC-ES was an effective adjunct to primary spine fusion,

especially for patients with posterolateral fusion and those with internal

fixation. These preliminary findings need to be validated by well-

designed studies.

The authors stated that this study had several drawbacks. First, this trial

did not collect pre-treatment clinical data, nor did it include validated

patient-reported outcomes measures (PROMs) such as those obtained

by the North American Spine Society (NASS) low back pain (LBP)

outcome assessment instrument. Second, this trial was quite complex

with a large array of indications and procedures. Some surgeons chose

internal fixation for all their patients undergoing fusions, while others

nerve used fixation. A simpler study could have resulted in stronger

conclusions over a narrower range of variables. Third, the impact of

workers’ compensation as well as the incidence of subsequent surgery

were not evaluated prospectively. The use of a follow-up surgery did not

exclude the possibility of selection bias because it was not possible to

contact all patients with 2-year follow-up. These researchers stated that

future plan for this clinical trial include completion of enrollment as well as

follow-up so that a larger number of patients could be analyzed. The

complete study data-base will be subjected to logistic regression analysis

for further investigation of the impact exerted by such variables as the

type of fusion procedures, the sue of internal fixation, 1-level versus 2-

level fusions, smoking, previous surgery, and the like.

Kaiser et al (2014) stated that the relationship between the formation of a

solid arthrodesis and electrical and electro-magnetic energy is well

established; most of the information on the topic, however, pertains to the

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

39/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

healing of long bone fractures. The use of both invasive and non-

invasive means to supply this energy and supplement spinal fusions has

been examined – 3 forms of ES are commonly employed: DC stimulation

(DCS), PEMF stimulation (PEMFS), as well as CC-ES. Only DCS

requires the placement of electrodes within the fusion substrate and was

inserted at the time of surgery. Based on available evidence, no conflict

with the previous recommendations was generated. The use of DCS is

recommended as an option for patients younger than 60 years of age,

since a positive effect on fusion has been observed. The same, however,

could not be stated for patients over 60, because DCS did not appear to

have an impact on fusion rates in this population. No study was reviewed

that examined the use of CC-ES or the routine use of PEMFS. These

researchers noted that a single, low-level study reported a positive impact

of PEMFS on patients undergoing revision surgery for pseudarthrosis;

however, this single study was insufficient to recommend for or against

the use of PEMFS in this patient population.

Cruz et al (2021) noted that lumbar spinal fusion is a commonly

performed procedure to stabilize the spine, and the frequency with which

this operation is performed is increasing. Multiple factors are involved in

achieving successful arthrodesis. Systemic factors include patient

medical co-morbidities (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis and osteoporosis) as

well as smoking status. Surgical site factors include choice of bone graft

material, number of fusion levels, location of fusion bed, adequate

preparation of fusion site, as well as biomechanical properties of the

fusion construct. Rates of successful fusion could vary from 65 % to 100

%, depending on the afore-mentioned factors. Diagnosis of

pseudoarthrosis is confirmed by imaging studies, often a combination of

static and dynamic radiographs and computed tomography (CT). Once

pseudoarthrosis is identified, patient factors should be optimized

whenever possible and a surgical plan implemented to provide the best

chance of successful revision arthrodesis with the least amount of

surgical risk. These investigators noted that ES in the post-operative

period has been used to augment fusion. Passage of an electric current

results in increased collagen synthesis and fibrocyte recruitment to the

fusion site -- DCS requires intra-operative placement of electrodes in

contact with the fusion mass; PEMFS and CC-ES may be applied

externally. In an updated clinical guideline for use of BGS as an adjunct

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

40/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

for lumbar fusion, Kaiser et al (2014) found limited evidence for the use of

DCS in patients younger than 60 years, but insufficient evidence to

recommend for or against the use of PEMFS or CC-ES.

Patel et al (2021) stated that the incidence of 3- and 4-level lumbar

arthrodesis is rising due to an aging population, and fusion rates affect

clinical success in this population. PEMFS is used as an adjunct to

increase fusion rates following multi-level arthrodesis. In a retrospective,

multi-center study, these researchers examined the fusion rates for

subjects who underwent 3- and 4-level lumbar interbody arthrodesis

following PEMFS. Patient charts that listed 3- or 4-level lumbar

arthrodesis with adjunctive use of a PEMFS device were evaluated.

Inclusion criteria entailed patients who were diagnosed with lumbar

degenerative disease, spinal stenosis, and/or spondylolisthesis (grade-1

or grade-2). A radiographic evaluation of fusion status was carried out at

12 months by the treating physicians. Fusion rates were stratified by

graft material, surgical interbody approach, and certain clinical risk factors

for pseudoarthrosis. A total of 55 patients were identified who had a 12-

month follow-up. The radiographic fusion rate was 92.7 % (51 patients)

at 12 months. There were no significant differences in fusion rates for

patients treated with allograft or autograft, for patients with different

interbody approaches, or for those with or without certain clinical risk

factors. The authors concluded that PEMFS may be a useful adjunct for

treatment of patients with surgical risk factors, such as multi-level

arthrodesis, and clinical risk factors. Level of Evidence = IV.

The authors stated that drawbacks of this trial included the lack of a

concurrent control. This was a retrospective study that examined the

standard clinical practice of 4 surgeons using PEMFS for multi-level

arthrodesis and no non-PEMF comparator was available. Another

drawback was that the treating surgeon determined the fusion status, and

surgeon bias was known with respect to consideration of other clinical

outcome parameters. In addition, retrospective studies have the potential

for selection bias, and no assessment of patient accountability was

possible with the data collected; however, data from all patients who met

the inclusion and exclusion criteria were reported in this study. Certain

risk factors for pseudoarthrosis such as at least grade-2

spondylolisthesis, scoliosis, trauma, being morbidly obese, as well as an

active bacterial infection were excluded from the study; therefore, the

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

41/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

effect of PEMFS on a population with these risk factors is unknown.

Although PEMFS was prescribed for 3 to 6 months, PEMFS compliance

was not measured.

Javeed et al (2023) stated that DC-ES may serve as a promising non-

pharmacological adjunct promoting osteogenesis and fusion. In a

computational study, these researchers examined the use of electro-

active spine instrumentation in the focal delivery of therapeutic ES to

enhance lumbar bone formation and interbody fusion. A finite element

model of adult human lumbar spine (L4 to L5) instrumented with single-

level electro-active pedicle screws was simulated; DC-ES was routed via

anodized electro-active pedicle screws to target regions of fusion. The

electrical fields generated by electro-active pedicle screws were

examined in various tissue compartments including isotropic tissue

volumes, cortical, and trabecular bone. Electrical field distributions at

various stimulation amplitudes (20 to 100 µA) and pedicle screw

anodization patterns were analyzed in target regions of fusion (e.g.,

intervertebral disc space, vertebral body, and pedicles). Electrical

stimulation with electro-active pedicle screws at various stimulation

amplitudes and anodization patterns enabled modulation of spatial

distribution and intensity of electric fields within the target regions of

lumbar spine. Anodized screws (50 %) versus un-anodized screws (0 %)

induced high-amplitude electric fields within the intervertebral disc space

and vertebral body but negligible electric fields in spinal canal. DC-ES via

anodized screws induced electrical fields, at therapeutic threshold of

greater than 1 mV/cm, sufficient for osteo-induction within the target

interbody region. The authors concluded that selective anodization of

electro-active pedicle screws may enable focal delivery of therapeutic ES

in the target regions in human lumbar spine. Moreover, these

researchers stated that the findings of this study warrants pre-clinical as

well as clinical testing of integrated electro-active system in inducing

target lumbar fusion in-vivo. They stated that this study provided a

foundation for clinically examining electro-active instrumentation to

enhance spinal fusion.

Weinstein et al (2023) noted that lumbar spinal fusion surgeries are

increasing steadily due to an aging and ever-growing population.

Patients undergoing lumbar spinal fusion surgery may present with risk

factors that contribute to complications, pseudarthrosis, prolonged pain,

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

42/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

and reduced quality of life (QOL). PEMFS represents an adjunct non-

invasive intervention that has been reported to enhance fusion as well as

patient outcomes following spinal surgery. In a prospective, multi-center

study, these investigators examined the use of PEMFS as an adjunctive

treatment to lumbar spinal fusion procedures in patients at risk for

pseudarthrosis. Patients with at least 1 of the following risk factors were

enrolled: prior failed fusion, multi-level fusion, nicotine use, osteoporosis,

or diabetes. Fusion status was determined by radiographic imaging, and

patient-reported outcomes (PROs) were also evaluated. A total of 142

patients were included in the analysis. Fusion status was examined at 12

months follow-up where 88.0 % (n = 125/142) of patients showed

successful fusion. Fusion success for patients with 1, 2+, or 3+ risk

factors was 88.5 %, 87.5 %, and 82.3 %, respectively. Significant

improvements in PROs using the Short Form 36 (SF-36), EuroQol 5

Dimension (EQ-5D) survey, Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), and VAS for

back and leg pain were also observed compared with baseline scores (p

< 0.001). A favorable safety profile was observed. PEMFS revealed a

positive benefit-risk profile throughout the 6-month required use period.

The authors concluded that the addition of PEMFS as an adjunctive

treatment in patients undergoing lumbar spinal surgery may result in

improved fusion and PROs, regardless of risk factors.

The authors stated that study drawbacks included potential variability in

the determination of fusion status via X-ray/CT imaging and clinical

impression per each incidence and standard of care (SOC). This trial did

not have a control arm, which impeded the direct comparison of fusion

success and PROs in patients who were treated with PEMFS versus

without PEMFS. In lieu of no control arm, the reported rates serve as an

initial basis for these researchers’ exploration into the benefit of PEMFs

using SpinalStim following lumbar spinal surgery and provided rates in

keeping with other reported clinical evidence. Moreover, these

investigators stated that another study is currently underway to further

examine the impact of PEMFS compared with untreated control patients.

Patel et al (2024) noted that certain risk factors predispose patients to

pseudarthrosis, which is associated with prolonged pain, reduced

function, and decreased QOL. These researchers examined cervical

spine fusion rates in subjects with risk factors for pseudarthrosis who

received PEMFS. Subjects in the PEMFS group were treated with

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

43/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

PEMFS for 6 months post-operatively. The primary outcome measure

was fusion status at the 12-month follow-up period. Fusion status was

determined using anterior/posterior, lateral, and flexion/extension

radiographs and CT (without contrast). A total of 213 patients were

examined (PEMFS, n = 160; Control, n = 53). At baseline, the PEMFS

group had a higher percentage of subjects who used nicotine (p = 0.01),

had osteoporosis (p < 0.05), multi-level disease (p < 0.0001), and were

over the age of 65 years (p = 0.01). The PEMFS group showed over 2-

fold higher percentage of subjects that had 3 or more risk factors (n =

92/160, 57.5 %) compared with the control group (n= 14/53, 26.4 %). At

the 12-month follow-up, the PEMFS group showed significantly higher

fusion rates compared with the control (90.0 % versus 60.4 %, p < 0.05).

A statistically significant improvement in fusion rate was observed in

PEMFS subjects with multi-level surgery (p < 0.0001) and high body

mass index (BMI) (greater than 30 kg/m2; p =0.0021) when compared

with the control group. No significant safety concerns were observed.

The authors concluded that the adjunctive use of PEMFS provided

significant improvements in cervical spine fusion rates in subjects having

risk factors for pseudarthrosis. When compared with control subjects that

did not use PEMFS, treated subjects showed improved fusion outcomes

despite being older, having more risk factors for pseudarthrosis, and

undergoing more complex surgeries. The authors stated that a drawback

of this trial included comparison to a retrospective cohort for control rather

than a randomized concurrent control. Furthermore, the smaller sample

size in the control group (n = 53) was limiting. These researchers stated

that future investigations should aim to prospectively study larger,

enrolled control groups for comparison. Another drawback was the lack

of a central reading center to determine fusion status, which was

evaluated independently by each study site.

Luo et al (2024) stated that ES is an important adjuvant therapy for spinal

surgery; however, whether receiving ES could enhance the fusion rate

following spinal surgery is still controversial. In a systematic review and

meta-analysis, these researchers examined the effect of ES on the fusion

rate following spinal surgery. They systematically searched for related

studies published in the PubMed, Embase and Cochrane Library

databases on or before September 30, 2023. The odds ratio (OR) with

95 % confidence interval (CI) and the fusion rates of the experimental

group and the control group were calculated by a random-effects meta-

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

44/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

analysis model. The analysis demonstrated that receiving ES

significantly increased the probability of successful spinal fusion (OR

2.66; 95 % CI: 1.79 to 3.97), and the average fusion rate of the ES group

(86.8 %) was significantly greater than that of the control group (73.7 %).

The fusion rate in the DC stimulation group was 2.33 times greater than

that in the control group (OR 2.33; 95 % CI: 1.37 to 3.96), and that in the

PEMF group was 2.60 times greater than that in the control group (OR

2.60; 95 % CI: 1.29 to 5.27). Similarly, the fusion rate in the CC-ES group

was 3.44 times greater than that in the control group (OR 3.44; 95 % CI:

1.75 to 6.75), indicating that regardless of the type of ES, the fusion rate

following spinal surgery improved to a certain extent. The authors

concluded that ES as an adjuvant therapy appeared to improve the fusion

rate following spinal surgery to a certain extent; however, the specific

effectiveness of this therapy needs to be further studied.

Piazzolla et al (2024) stated that capacitively coupling electric fields

(CCEF) is a non-invasive method of biophysical stimulation that

enhances fracture repair and spinal fusion. In a randomized-controlled,

multi-center study, these investigators examined the roles of CCEF in the

resolution of vertebral bone marrow edema (VBME) using a follow-up

MRI study, as well as pain relief, analgesic drug consumption and QOL

improvement in stimulated patients who were referred with acute

vertebral fragility fractures (VFFs) compared to non-stimulated patients.

Between September 2016 and December 2019, patients who were

referred to the spine centers that participated in this trial with acute VFFs

of type OF1 or OF2 were included. All the VFFs were conservatively

managed according to Good Clinical Practice. Subjects were randomized

into 2 groups: the CCEF group received, as an adjunct to the clinical

study protocol, biophysical stimulation with a CCEF device for 8

hours/day for 60 days, whereas the control group was treated according

to the clinical study protocol. At baseline (T0), the 30-day follow-up (T1),

the 60-day follow-up (T2), and the 6-month follow-up (T3), each subject

underwent clinical evaluation using the VAS for pain and the ODI.

Analgesic therapy with paracetamol 1,000 mg tablets for 7 days or longer,

depending on the pain intensity, was carried out; participants were

required to report their paracetamol consumption on a specific sheet

between study day 8 to 180 days of follow-up. MRI studies of the

thoraco-lumbar spine were conducted at 0 (T0), 30 (T1) and 60 days of

follow-up (T2) using a 1.5-T MRI system in all of the centers that took part

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

45/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

in the study. For each VBME area examined via MRI, the vertebral body

geometry (i.e., anterior wall height/posterior wall height and vertebral

kyphosis) were assessed. A total of 66 patients (9 men [13.63 %]; mean

age of 73.15 years) with 69 VFFs were included in this trial and

randomized as follows: 33 patients were included in the control group and

the remaining 33 patients were randomized into the CCEF group. In the

CCEF group, good compliance with CCEF therapy was observed

(adherence = 94 %), and no adverse effects were recorded. In the

stimulated patients, faster VBME resolution and significantly less

vertebral body collapse during follow-up were observed compared to the

control patients. Furthermore, in the active group, faster pain reduction

as well as improvement in the ODI mean score were observed.

Stimulated patients also reported a significantly lower paracetamol

consumption rate from the 3rd follow-up after treatment until the 6-month

follow-up. In terms of sex-related differences, in the CCEF group, VBME

showed a faster resolution in male patients compared with females. The

authors concluded that biophysical stimulation with CCEF, as an adjunct

to traditional conservative treatment, was a useful tool to hasten the

VBME resolution process and prevent vertebral body deformation. These

MRI findings also correlated with faster back pain resolution and QOL

improvement. From the 3rd follow-up after treatment until the 6-month

follow-up, stimulated patients reported a significantly lower paracetamol

consumption than control patients, even though back pain and QOL

showed no significant differences between the 2 groups. Level of

Evidence = II.

The authors stated that the principal drawback of this trial was the lack of

a placebo device in the control group; however, the effectiveness of

capacitive biophysical stimulation over a placebo device has already

been documented; consequently, the use of a placebo device was

considered unnecessary in this study. Moreover, these researchers

stated that further investigations are needed to examine if capacitive

biophysical stimulation could be useful in preventing acute VFFs in

osteoporotic patients. In addition, considering the cross-talk between

bone and muscle as well as the concomitant sarcopenia in osteoporotic

patients, future studies should examine the role of CCEF in the treatment

and prevention of para-spinal sarcopenia in patients suffering from

osteosarcopenia.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

46/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Ganse (2024) noted that bone regeneration is a complex

pathophysiological process determined by molecular, cellular, and

biomechanical factors, including immune cells and growth factors.

Fracture healing usually takes several weeks to months, during which

patients are often immobilized and unable to work. As immobilization is

associated with negative health and socio-economic effects, it would be

desirable if fracture healing could be accelerated and the healing time

shortened. However, interventions for this objective are not yet part of

current clinical treatment guidelines, and there has never been a

comprehensive review specifically on this topic; thus, this narrative review

provided an overview of the available clinical evidence on methods that

accelerate fracture healing, with a focus on clinical applicability in healthy

patients without bone disease. The most promising methods identified

are the use of axial micromovement, electromagnetic stimulation with

electromagnetic fields (capacitive coupling or inductive coupling) and

direct electric currents, as well as the administration of growth factors and

parathyroid hormone. Some interventions have been shown to reduce

the healing time by up to 20 % to 30 %, potentially equivalent to several

weeks. As a combination of methods could decrease the healing time

even further than 1 method alone, especially if their mechanisms of action

differ, clinical studies in human patients are needed to examine the

individual and combined effects on healing progress. Studies are also

needed to determine the ideal settings for the interventions, i.e., optimal

frequencies, intensities, and exposure times throughout the separate

healing phases. The authors stated that more clinical research is also

desirable to create an evidence base for clinical guidelines. To make it

easier to carry out these investigations, the development of new methods

that allow better quantification of fracture-healing progress and speed in

human patients is needed.

References

The above policy is based on the following references:

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

47/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

1. Akai M, Hayashi K. Eﬀect of electrical stimulation on

musculoskeletal systems: A meta-analysis of controlled clinical

trials. Bioelectromagnetics. 2002;23(2):132-143.

2. Akai M, Kawashima N, Kimura T, Hayashi K. Electrical stimulation

as an adjunct to spinal fusion: A meta-analysis of controlled

clinical trials. Bioelectromagnetics. 2002;23(7):496-504.

3. Akhter S, Qureshi AR, Aleem I, et al. Eﬃcacy of electrical

stimulation for spinal fusion: A systematic review and meta-

analysis of randomized controlled trials. Sci Rep.

2020;10(1):4568.

4. Albert SF, Wong E. Electrical stimulation of bone repair. Clinics

Pod Med Surg. 1991;8(4):923-935.

5. Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research (AHFMR). Low

intensity ultrasound treatment of nonunion fractures. Techscan.

Edmonton, AB: AHFMR; April 1999.

6. Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research (AHFMR). The

use of electrical stimulation to promote healing of fractures.

Technote TN 1. Edmonton, AB: AHFMR; 1996.

7. Alsobrook J, Hatch RL. Proximal ﬁfth metatarsal fractures.

UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed

February 2013.

8. Banken R. Low-intensity ultrasound (Exogen) for the treatment of

fractures. AETMIS 03-05. Montreal, QC: Agence d'Evaluation des

Technologies et des Modes d'Intervention en Sante (AETMIS);

2004.

9. Basset C, Schink-Ascani M. Long-term pulsed electromagnetic

ﬁeld (PEMF) results in congenital pseudarthrosis. Calcif Tissue Int.

1991;49(3):216-220.

10. Beutler A, Titus S. General principles of deﬁnitive fracture

management. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA:

UpToDate; reviewed January 2019.

11. Beutler A. General principles of fracture management: Bone

healing and fracture description. UpToDate [online

serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed January 2019.

12. Bier RR, Estersohn HS. A new treatment for Charcot joint in the

diabetic foot. J Am Podiatr Med Assoc. 1987;77(2):63-99.

13. Bigliani LU, Rosenwasser MP, Caulo N, et al. The use of pulsing

electromagnetic ﬁelds to achieve arthrodesis of the knee

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

48/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

following failed total knee arthroplasty. A preliminary report. J

Bone Joint Surg Am. 1983;65(4):480-485.

14. Brighton CT. Use of constant direct current in the treatment of

nonunion. American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons,

Instructional Course Lectures. Park Ridge, IL: AAOS; 1981.

15. Brighton CT, Wang W, Seldes R, et al. Signal transduction in

electrically stimulated bone cells. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2001;83-

A(10):1514-1523.

16. Brown E. Noninvasive electrical stimulation for fracture

nonunions. Diagnostic and Therapeutic Technology Assessment,

American Medical Association. Chicago, IL: American Medical

Association; February 1, 1989.

17. Busse J W, Kaur J, Mollon B, et al. Low intensity pulsed

ultrasonography for fractures: Systematic review of randomised

controlled trials. Br Med J. 2009;338:b351.

18. Busse JW, Bhandari M, Kulkarni AV, Tunks E. The eﬀect of low-

intensity pulsed ultrasound therapy on time to fracture healing:

A meta-analysis. Can Med Assoc J. 2002;166(4):437-441.

19. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). Decision memo

for electrical stimulation for fracture healing (CAG-00043N).

Medicare Coverage Database. Baltimore, MD: CMS; November 9,

1999.

20. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Decision

memo for ultrasound stimulation for nonunion fracture healing

(CAG-00022R). Medicare Coverage Database. Baltimore, MD:

CMS; April 27, 2005.

21. Clugston JR, Hatch RL. Stress fractures of the metatarsal shaft.

UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed

January 2012.

22. Cook SD, Ryaby JP, McCabe J, et al. Acceleration of tibia and distal

radius fracture healing in patients who smoke. Clin Orthop.

1997;337:198-207.

23. Coric D, Bullard DE, Patel VV, et al. Pulsed electromagnetic ﬁeld

stimulation may improve fusion rates in cervical arthrodesis in

high-risk populations. Bone Joint Res. 2018;7(2):124-130.

24. Cruz A, Ropper AE, Xu DS, et al. Failure in lumbar spinal fusion

and current management modalities. Semin Plast Surg.

2021;35(1):54-62.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

49/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

25. deWeber K. Overview of stress fractures. UpToDate [online

serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed January 2012.

26. Duarte L, Choﬃe M. Low intensity pulsed ultrasound and eﬀects

on ununited fractures. Paper presented at the Orthopedic Health

Conference, University Hospital, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil,

June 1994.

27. Exogen. Summary of safety and eﬃcacy data. Exogen 2000 or

Sonic Accelerated Fracture Healing System. PMA

Number:900009, Suppl. 6. Piscataway, NJ: Exogen; 2000.

28. Fiechtl J. Pelvic trauma: Initial evaluation and management.

UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed

February 2021.

29. Foley KT, Mroz TE, Arnold PM, et al. Randomized, prospective,

and controlled clinical trial of pulsed electromagnetic ﬁeld

stimulation for cervical fusion. Spine J. 2008;8(3):436-442.

30. Frankel VH. Results of prescription use of pulse ultrasound

therapy in fracture management. Surg Technol Int. 1998:VII;389-

393.

31. Ganse B. Methods to accelerate fracture healing -- a narrative

review from a clinical perspective. Front Immunol.

2024;15:1384783.

32. Garland DE, Moses B, Salyer W. Long-term follow-up of fracture

nonunions treated with PEMFs. Contemp Orthoped.

1991;22(3):295-302.

33. Goldstein C, Sprague S, Petrisor BA. Electrical stimulation for

fracture healing: Current evidence. J Orthop Trauma. 2010;24

Suppl 1:S62-S65.

34. Goodwin CB, Brighton CT, Guyer RD. A double-blind study of

capacitively coupled electrical stimulation as an adjunct to

lumbar spinal fusions. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1999;24(13):1349-

1356; discussion 1357.

35. Gravlee JR, Hatch RL. Toe fractures in adults. UpToDate [online

serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed January 2019.

36. Griﬃth XL, Costello L, Costa ML. The role of low intensity pulsed

ultrasound therapy in the management of acute fractures: A

systematic review. J Trauma. 2998;65:1446-1452.

37. Gudas CJ, Cann JE. Nonunions and related disorders. Clinics

Podiatr Med Surg. 1991;8(2):321-339.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

50/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

38. Hadjiargyrou M, McLeod K, Ryaby JP, et al. Enhancement of

fracture healing by low intensity ultrasound. Clin Orthop.

1998;355 Suppl:S216-S229.

39. Hanft JR, Goggin JP, Landsman A, Surprenant M. The role of

combined magnetic ﬁeld bone growth stimulation as an adjunct

in the treatment of neuroarthropathy/Charcot joint: An

expanded pilot study. J Foot Ankle Surg. 1998;37(6):510-515;

discussion 550-551.

40. Heckman JD, Ryaby JP, McCabe J, et al. Acceleration of tibial

fracture-healing by non-invasive, low-intensity pulsed

ultrasound. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1994;76(1):26-34.

41. Hockenbury RT, Gruttadauria M, McKinney I. Use of implantable

bone growth stimulation in Charcot ankle arthrodesis. Foot Ankle

Int. 2007;28(9):971-976.

42. Holmes GB. Treatment of delayed unions and nonunions of the

proximal ﬁfth metatarsal with pulsed electromagnetic ﬁelds. Foot

Ankle Int. 1994;15(10):552-556.

43. Javeed S, Zhang JK, Greenberg JK, et al. Electroactive spinal

instrumentation for targeted osteogenesis and spine fusion: A

computational study. Int J Spine Surg. 2023;17(1):95-102.

44. Kahanovitz N. Spine update. The use of adjunctive electrical

stimulation to enhance the healing of spine fusions. Spine.

1996;21(21):2523-2525.

45. Kaiser MG, Eck JC, Groﬀ MW, et al. Guideline update for the

performance of fusion procedures for degenerative disease of

the lumbar spine. Part 17: Bone growth stimulators as an adjunct

for lumbar fusion. J Neurosurg Spine. 2014;21(1):133-139.

46. Kane WJ. Direct current electrical bone growth stimulation for

spinal fusion. Spine. 1988;13:163-165.

47. Kennedy WF, Roberts CG, Zuege RC, Dicus WT. Use of pulsed

electromagnetic ﬁelds in treatment of loosened cemented hip

prostheses. A double-blind trial. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1993;

(286):198-205.

48. Kohata K, Itoh S, Takeda S, et al. Enhancement of fracture healing

by electrical stimulation in the comminuted intraarticular

fracture of distal radius. Biomed Mater Eng. 2013;23(6):485-93.

49. Konrad K, Sevcic K, Foldes K, et al. Therapy with pulsed

electromagnetic ﬁelds in aseptic loosening of total hip

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

51/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

protheses: A prospective study. Clin Rheumatol. 1996;15(4):325-

328.

50. Kristiansen TK, Ryaby JP, McCabe J, et al. Accelerated healing of

distal radial fractures with the use of speciﬁc, low-intensity

ultrasound. A multicenter, prospective, randomized, double-

blind, placebo-controlled study. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1997;79

(7):961-973.

51. Luo M, Zeng X, Jiang L, et al. Eﬀect of electrical stimulation on the

fusion rate after spinal surgery: A systematic review and meta-

analysis. Neurosurg Rev. 2024;47(1):618.

52. Mackenzie D, Veninga FD. Reversal of delayed union of anterior

cervical fusion treated with pulsed electromagnetic ﬁeld

stimulation: Case report. South Med J. 2004;97(5):519-524.

53. Malanga GA, Tung DL, Kim N, Perez C. Pars interarticularis injury:

Treatment & medication. eMedicine. New York, NY: Medscape;

December 17, 2009.

54. Massari L, Caruso G, Sollazzo V, Setti S. Pulsed electromagnetic

ﬁelds and low intensity pulsed ultrasound in bone tissue. Clin

Cases Miner Bone Metab. 2009; 6(2):149-154.

55. Matur AV, Plummer ZJ, Mejia-Munne JC, et al. Noninvasive

electrical stimulation as an adjunct to fusion procedures: A

systematic review and meta-analysis. J Neurosurg Spine.

2022;37(1):137-148.

56. Mayr E, Frankel V, Rüter A. Ultrasound -- an alternative healing

method for nonunions? Orthop Trauma Surg. 2000;120:1-8.

57. Mayr E, Wagner S, Ecker M, et al. Ultrasound therapy for

nonunions (pseudarthrosis): 3 case reports. Unfallchirurg.

1999;123:191-196.

58. Mayr E, Wagner S, Rüter A. Treatment of nonunions by means of

low-intensity ultrasound. Unfallchirurg. 1997;121:958-962.

59. Medical Services Advisory Committee (MSAC). Low intensity

ultrasound treatment for acceleration of bone fracture healing -

Exogen bone growth stimulator. Assessment Report. MSAC

Application 1030. Canberra, ACT: MSAC; 2001.

60. Mooney V. A randomized double-blind prospective study of the

eﬃcacy of pulsed electromagnetic ﬁelds for interbody lumbar

fusions. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1990;15(7):708-712.

61. NHIC, Corp. Osteogenesis stimulators. Policy Article A35349.

Durable Medical Equipment Medicare Administrative Contractor

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

52/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

(DME MAC) Jurisdiction A. Hingham, MA: NHIC; revised August 1,

2009.

62. NHIC, Corp. Osteogenesis stimulators. Local Coverage

Determination L11501. Durable Medical Equipment Medicare

Administrative Contractor (DME MAC) Jurisdiction A. Hingham,

MA: NHIC; revised August 1, 2009.

63. Parvizi J, Vegari D. Pulsed low-intensity ultrasound for fracture

healing. Foot Ankle Clin N Am. 2005;10:595-608.

64. Patel V, Wind JJ, Aleem I, et al. Adjunctive use of bone growth

stimulation increases cervical spine fusion rates in patients at

risk for pseudarthrosis. Clin Spine Surg. 2024;37(4):124-130.

65. Patel VV, Billys J, Okonkwo DO, et al. Three- and 4-level lumbar

arthrodesis using adjunctive pulsed electromagnetic ﬁeld

stimulation: A multicenter retrospective evaluation of fusion

rates and a review of the literature. Int J Spine Surg.

2021;15(2):228-233.

66. Perlman MH, Thordarson DB. Ankle fusion in a high risk

population: An assessment of nonunion risk factors. Foot Ankle

Int. 1999;20(8):491-496.

67. Phillips MR, Harrison A, Mehta S, et al. A scoping review of

operative and non-invasive management in the treatment of

non-unions. Injury. 2022;53(12):3872-3878.

68. Piazzolla A, Bizzoca D, Barbanti-Brodano G, et al. Capacitive

biophysical stimulation improves the healing of vertebral fragility

fractures: A prospective multicentre randomized controlled trial.

J Orthop Traumatol. 2024;25(1):17.

69. Ricardo M. The eﬀect of ultrasound on the healing of muscle-

pediculated bone graft in scaphoid non-union. Int Orthop.

2006;30(2):123-127.

70. Rosen HN, Walega DR. Osteoporotic thoracolumbar vertebral

compression fractures: Clinical manifestations and treatment.

UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed

February 2021.

71. Rue JP, Armstrong DW 3rd, Frassica FJ, et al. The eﬀect of pulsed

ultrasound in the treatment of tibial stress fractures.

Orthopedics. 2004;27(11):1192-1195.

72. Schoelles K, Snyder D, Kaczmarek J, et al. The role of bone growth

stimulating devices and orthobiologics in healing nonunion

fractures. Technology Assessment. Prepared by the ECRI

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

53/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Evidence-Based Practice Center for the Agency for Healthcare

Research and Quality (AHRQ). Rockville, MD: AHRQ; September

21, 2005.

73. Scott G, King JB. A prospective, double-blind trial of electrical

capacitive coupling in the treatment of non-union of long bones.

J Bone Joint Surg. 1994;76A(6):820-826.

74. Simonis RB, Parnell EJ, Ray PS, Peacock JL. Electrical treatment of

tibial non-union: A prospective, randomised, double-blind trial.

Injury. 2003;34(5):357-362.

75. Smith C, Kumar S, Causby R. The eﬀectiveness of non-surgical

interventions in the treatment of Charcot foot. Int J Evid Based

Healthc. 2007;5(4):437-449.

76. Staﬀord CD, 2nd, Colberg RE, Nourse AL. Chronic ischial

tuberosity avulsion nonunion fracture treated with a platelet-rich

plasma injection as a bone graft. Regen Med. 2019;14(5):353-358.

77. Stasinopoulos D. Treatment of spondylolysis with external

electrical stimulation in young athletes: A critical literature

review. Br J Sports Med. 2004;38(3):352-354.

78. Strauss E, Ryay JP, McCabe J. Treatment of Jones' fractures of the

foot with adjunctive use of low-pulsed ultrasound stimulation. J

Orthopedic Trauma. 1999;13:310.

79. Tejano NA, Puno R, Ignacio JM. The use of implantable direct

current stimulation in multilevel spinal fusion without

instrumentation. Spine. 1996;21(16):1904-1908.

80. Theragen. ActaStim. Innovation in Spine Fusion Therapy

[website]. Jacksonville, FL: Theragen; 2025.

81. U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). FDA approves device to

speed healing of fractures. FDA Talk Paper. Rockville, MD: FDA;

October 12, 1994.

82. Wang JC, Le AW, Tsukuda RK. A new technique for Charcot's foot

reconstruction. J Am Podiatr Med Assoc. 2002;92(8):429-436.

83. Warden SJ, Bennell KL, McMeeken JM, et al. Acceleration of fresh

fracture repair using the sonic accelerated fracture healing

system (SAFHS): A review. Calcif Tissue Int. 2000;66:157-163.

84. Watanabe Y, Matsushita T, Bhandari M, et al. Ultrasound for

fracture healing: Current evidence. J Orthop Trauma. 2010;24

Suppl 1:S56-S61.

85. Weinstein MA, Beaumont A, Campbell P, et al. Pulsed

electromagnetic ﬁeld stimulation in lumbar spine fusion for

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

54/55

10/25/25, 12:11 PM

Bone Growth Stimulators - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

patients with risk factors for pseudarthrosis. Int J Spine Surg.

2023;17(6):816-823.

86. Welch WC, Willis SL, Gerszten PC. Implantable direct current

stimulation in para-axial cervical arthrodesis. Adv Ther.

2004;21(6):389-400.

87. Zura RD, Sasser B, Sabesan V, et al. A survey of orthopaedic

traumatologists concerning the use of bone growth stimulators. J

Surg Orthop Adv. 2007;16(1):1-4.

Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist in administering plan benefits and

constitute neither offers of coverage nor medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only a partial, general description of plan or

program benefits and does not constitute a contract. Aetna does not provide health care services and, therefore, cannot guarantee any

results or outcomes. Participating providers are independent contractors in private practice and are neither employees nor agents of Aetna

or its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for medical advice and treatment of members. This Clinical Policy Bulletin may be

updated and therefore is subject to change.

Copyright © 2001-2025 Aetna Inc.

Language services can be provided by calling the number on your member ID card. For additional language assistance: Español Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Pусский ةيبرعلا Kreyòl Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch ⽇本語 یسراف Other

Languages…

(http://www.aetna.com/individuals-families/contact-aetna/information-in-other-languages.html)

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/300_399/0343.html

55/55