10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

-->

(https://www.aetna.com/)

Epidural Injection Technologies

Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins

Clinical Policy Bulletins

Number: 0934

Table Of Contents

Policy History

Policy

Applicable CPT / HCPCS / ICD-10 Codes

Last Review

Background

04/08/2025

References

Effective: 08/20/2018

Next Review: 10/08/2026

Review History

Deﬁnitions

Policy

Additional Information

Scope of Policy

Clinical Policy Bulletin

This Clinical Policy Bulletin addresses epidural injection technologies.

Notes

I. Medical Necessity

A. Aetna considers epidural blood patching (EBP) medically

necessary for the following indications:

1. Treatment of post-dural puncture headache (PDPH) if

member exhibited prolonged headaches (greater than 24

hours);

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

1/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

2. Treatment of spontaneous intracranial hypotension in

members with orthostatic headache for more than 2 weeks

if either of the following selection criteria is met:

a. Brain MRI documenting dural enhancement; or

b. Spinal imaging documenting epidural collection of CSF

or site of CSF leak;

3. Repeat epidural blood patching (EBP) if the initial patch

does not produce prolonged relief and additional spinal

imaging identiﬁes a site of CSF leak.

B. Aetna considers transforaminal EBP medically necessary for

the treatment of post-dural puncture headache when EBP

using an interlaminar approach was ineﬀective.

II. Experimental, Investigational, or Unproven

The following procedures are considered experimental,

investigational, or unproven because the eﬀectiveness of these

approaches has not been established:

Prophylactic EBP

EBP for the treatment of post-dural puncture tinnitus

EBP for the treatment of suspected cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF)

leak not conforming to 3rd edition International Classiﬁcation

of Headache Disorders (ICHD-3) criteria for spontaneous

intracranial hypotension (absence of features of a CSF leak via

imaging; or CSF opening pressure of 6 cm H2O or greater)

Epidural ﬁbrin glue patching for the treatment of PDPH

Epidural autologous platelet-rich-plasma patching for the

treatment of PDPH

Real-time pressure-sensing epidural guidance.

III. Related Policies

CPB 0722 - Transforaminal Epidural Injections

(..700_799/0722.html)

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

2/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

CPT Codes / HCPCS Codes / ICD-10 Codes

CPT codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Code

Code Description

Injection, epidural, of blood or clot patch

62273

CPT codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Injection(s), platelet rich plasma, any site, including image

0232T

guidance, harvesting and preparation when performed [epidural

autologous platelet-rich-plasma patching]

Real-time pressure-sensing epidural guidance system (List

0777T

separately in addition to code for primary procedure)

Other CPT codes related to the CPB:

62320 - 62323 Injection(s), of diagnostic or therapeutic substance(s) (eg,

anesthetic, antispasmodic, opioid, steroid, other solution), not

including neurolytic substances, including needle or catheter

placement, interlaminar epidural or subarachnoid, cervical or

thoracic or lumbar or sacral (caudal) [not covered for epidural

fibrin glue patching]

70551 - 70553 Magnetic resonance (eg, proton) imaging, brain

Ultrasonic guidance for needle placement (eg, biopsy,

76942

aspiration, injection, localization device), imaging supervision

and interpretation

Fluoroscopic guidance and localization of needle or catheter tip

77003

for spine or paraspinous diagnostic or therapeutic injection

procedures (epidural or subarachnoid) (List separately in

addition to code for primary procedure)

Computed tomography guidance for needle placement (eg,

77012

biopsy, aspiration, injection, localization device), radiological

supervision and interpretation

HCPCS codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Platelet rich plasma, each unit [epidural autologous platelet-

P9020

rich-plasma patching]

Other HCPCS codes related to the CPB:

Injection, hydrocortisone sodium succinate, up to 100 mg

J1720

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

3/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Cerebrospinal fluid leak

G96.00 -

G96.09

Intracranial hypotension, spontaneous [Absence of features of a

G96.811

CSF leak via imaging; or CSF opening pressure of 6 cm H2O or

greater]

Other reaction to spinal and lumbar puncture [covered for post-

G97.1

dural puncture headache (PDPH)] [not covered for post-dural

puncture tinnitus]

Intracranial hypotension following ventricular shunting

G97.2

[spontaneous intracranial hypotension]

Spinal and epidural anesthesia induced headache during

O29.40 -

pregnancy

O29.43

Spinal and epidural anesthesia-induced headache during the

O89.4

puerperium

Headache with orthostatic component, not elsewhere classified

R51.0

Other complications of anesthesia [covered for post-dural

T88.59xA -

puncture headache (PDPH)] [not covered for post-dural

T88.59xS

puncture tinnitus]

ICD-10 codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Tinnitus [post-dural puncture tinnitus]

H93.11 -

H93.19

Background

Epidural Blood Patching (EBP) for the Treatment of Post-Dural

Puncture Headache

Post-dural-puncture headache (PDPH) is a complication of puncture of

the dura mater. The headache can be severe and it entails the back and

front of the head, and spreading to the neck and shoulders, sometimes

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

4/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

involving neck stiffness. It is exacerbated by movement, and sitting or

standing, and relieved to some degree by lying down. Nausea, vomiting,

pain in arms and legs, hearing loss, tinnitus, vertigo, dizziness and

paresthesia of the scalp are common. It is a common side-effect of spinal

anesthesia and lumbar puncture and may occasionally accidentally occur

in epidural anesthesia. Leakage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) through the

dura mater puncture causes reduced fluid levels in the brain and spinal

cord, and may lead to the development of PDPH hours or days later.

Some individuals require no other treatment than pain medications and

bed rest. Persistent and severe PDPH may require an epidural blood

patching (EBP), which entails injection of a small amount of autologous

blood into the epidural space to stop certain types of spinal headaches.

This resulting blood clot patches the hole in the spine and treats the

patient’s headache symptoms. It is also believed that EBP causes

compression and relieves the pressure state in the head, which causes

the headache. In a very small percentage of cases, the headache can

recur, and EBP may need to be repeated. Epidural blood patching is

generally well-tolerated, and has a low incidence of complications, which

include slight back pain, stiffness in the neck and low-grade fever.

Success rates of EBP varying from 60 to 95 % have been reported; this

variability may be a consequence of a higher efficacy rate when EBP is

used for small dural punctures. Epidural blood patching usually takes

approximately 15 minutes and is carried out in an out-patient setting (No

authors listed, 2001; Turnbull and Shepherd, 2003).

In a Cochrane review, Boonmak and Boonmak (2010) examined the

possible benefits and harms of EBP in both prevention and treatment of

post-dural puncture headache (PDPH). These investigators searched the

Cochrane PaPaS Group Trials Register; CENTRAL; Medline and Embase

in April 2009. They sought all randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that

compared EBP versus no EBP in the prevention or treatment of PDPH

among all types of participants undergoing dural puncture for any

reason. One review author extracted details of trial methodology and

outcome data from studies considered eligible for inclusion. These

researchers invited authors of all such studies to provide any details that

were unavailable in the published reports. They performed intention-to-

treat (ITT) analyses using the Peto O-E method. They also extracted

information about adverse effects (AEs; post-dural puncture backache

and epidural infection). A total of 9 studies (379 participants) were eligible

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

5/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

for inclusion. Prophylactic EBP improved PDPH compared to no

treatment (odds ratio [OR] 0.11, 95 % confidence interval [CI]: 0.02 to

0.64, 1 study), conservative treatment (OR 0.06, 95 % CI: 0.03 to 0.14, 2

studies) and epidural saline patch (OR 0.16, 95 % CI: 0.04 to 0.55, 1

study). However, prophylactic EBP did not result in less PDPH than a

sham procedure (1 study). Therapeutic EBP resulted in less PDPH than

conservative treatment (OR 0.18, 95 % CI: 0.04 to 0.76, 1 study) and a

sham procedure (OR 0.04, 95 % CI: 0.00 to 0.39, 1 study). Backache

was more common with EBP. However, these studies had very small

numbers of participants and outcome events, as well as uncertainties

about trial methodology, which precluded reliable assessments of the

potential benefits and harms of the intervention. The authors did not

recommend prophylactic EBP over other treatments because there were

too few trial participants to allow reliable conclusions to be drawn.

However, therapeutic EBP showed a benefit over conservative treatment,

based on the limited available evidence.

Gottschalk (2015) stated that in most cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks are

iatrogenic and caused by medical interventions (e.g., lumbar puncture,

peri-dural anesthesia and surgical interventions on the spine). However,

spontaneous cerebral hypotension is currently detected more frequently

due to improvements in diagnostic possibilities but often the cause cannot

be clarified with certainty. There are various diagnostic tools for

confirming the diagnosis and searching for the site of CSF leakage, such

as post-myelography computed tomography (postmyelo-CT), indium-111

radioisotope cisternography and (myelo) magnetic resonance imaging

(MRI), which show different sensitivities. In accordance with the authors’

experience, native MRI with fat-saturated T2-weighted sequences is often

sufficient for diagnosing CSF leakage and the site. For the remaining

cases, an additional postmyelo-CT or alternatively myelo-MRI is

recommended. In some patients with spontaneous cranial hypotension

multiple CSF leaks are found at different spinal levels. The main

symptom in most cases is an orthostatic headache. While post-puncture

syndrome is self-limiting in many cases, spontaneous CSF leakage

usually requires EBP. Lumbar EBP can be safely carried out under

guidance by fluoroscopy. In the case of a cervical or dorsal blood patch,

CT guidance is recommended, which ensures epidural application of the

blood patch and minimizes the risk of damaging the spinal cord. Despite

a high success rate at the 1st attempt with a blood patch of up to 85 %,

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

6/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

some cases require repeating blood patching. A targeted blood patch of

a CSF leak should generally be favored over a blindly placed blood patch;

nevertheless, if a CSF leak cannot be localized by CT or MRI a

therapeutic attempt with a lumbar blood patch can be carried out. After a

successful blood patch, intracranial hygromas and pachymeningeal

enhancement in the head showed fast regression; however, epidural

hygromas of the spine could persist for a period of several months, even

though patients are already symptoms-free. The authors concluded that

EBP is a safe and relatively simple method with a high success rate; thus;

it represents the therapy of choice in patients with spontaneous CSF

leakage as well as in cases of PDPH refractory to conservative therapy.

Kapoor and Ahmed (2015) stated that EBP is rarely performed at the

cervical levels, primarily due to fear of neurological complications such as

spinal cord compression. These investigators reviewed the literature to

provide an evidence-based review of performance of cervical EBPs, with

a specific focus on indication, technique, safety, and efficacy. They

performed a comprehensive electronic literature search to include studies

that reported on performance of cervical EBPs in patients with CSF leak

at the cervical level. Data regarding indication, level of CSF leak, level of

cervical EBP, volume of blood used, efficacy, and complications were

collected. A total of 15 studies, reporting on 19 patients were included.

All patients presented with a headache that increased in the standing

position, and improved in the supine position. All patients were identified

to have a CSF leak at the cervical level; 8 patients first underwent a

lumbar EBP, without complete, long-term relief. All these patients, along

with 11 patients who did not undergo a lumbar EPB prior to cervical EBP,

reported complete, long-term pain relief; EBPs were mostly done in the

prone position, using imaging guidance. An average of 5 to 8 ml of

autologous blood was injected in the epidural space. No major

neurological complications were reported in any patient. The authors

concluded that the findings of this review suggested that cervical EBP

can be performed for cervical CSF leaks associated with positional

headache without a significant risk of serious AEs. This review provided

Class II level of evidence that cervical EBPs were safe and effective in

reliving positional headache due to CSF leak.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

7/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Suescun and associates (2016) noted that PDPH due to accidental dural

puncture during epidural catheter placement is a source of morbidity for

new mothers. It can interfere with maternal-newborn bonding and

increase the length of hospitalization. This evidence-based article

examined the question: For obstetric patients experiencing an accidental

dural puncture during epidural placement, which non-pharmacologic

prophylactic neuraxial interventions safely and effectively decrease the

incidence of PDPH? A search of online databases revealed 4 systematic

reviews with meta-analysis and a RCT meeting the inclusion criteria; 3 of

the 4 systematic reviews used rigorous appraisal methods; 2 systematic

reviews included non-obstetric populations and 3 included additional

interventions. Subgroup analyses allowed examination of the

interventions of interest. Non-pharmacologic prophylactic neuraxial

interventions included prophylactic EBP, epidural saline administration,

and intra-thecal catheter placement. There was a lack of standardization

of interventions. The authors concluded that the evidence suggested

there may be value in performing a prophylactic blood patch or placing an

intra-thecal catheter. The risk of the intervention must be carefully

weighed with the benefits. They stayed that further rigorous studies are

needed to help determine the best methods to decrease the incidence of

PDPH in obstetric patients experiencing an accidental dural puncture

during epidural placement.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Post-lumbar puncture headache”

(Sun-Edelstein and Lay, 2018a) states that “Other agents that have been

evaluated for the treatment of PLPHA in small controlled trials or case

series include oral and intravenous caffeine, epidural saline,

intramuscular adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and intravenous

synthetic ACTH, oral gabapentin, intravenous hydrocortisone, oral

theophylline, and subcutaneous sumatriptan, and sphenopalatine block

… Of these, the limited available data suggest modest effectiveness for

gabapentin, hydrocortisone, and theophylline. For patients with moderate

to severe PLPHA that is prolonged (greater than 24 hours) and refractory

to conservative measures, we suggest treatment with epidural blood

patch (Grade 1B)”.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

8/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

EBP for the Treatment of Spontaneous Intracranial Hypotension

Girgis and co-workers (2015) noted that spontaneous intracranial

hypotension (SIH) is caused by spinal CSF leakage. Treatment is

directed at sealing the site of leak, which is often difficult to localize.

These researchers presented a case of near fatal SIH that was treated

with thoracic EBP. A 47-year old man presented with orthostatic

headache and bilateral cranial nerve VI palsies progressing over several

weeks. Brain MRI showed features typical of SIH and identified an

epidural collection stretching from spinal levels C6 to T4, but further

imaging with MR myelography and radionuclide cisternography failed to

identify a precise site of leak. The patient worsened in the hospital

requiring craniotomy for evacuation of an evolving subdural hematoma

(SDH). Epidural blood patch was performed at the T1 to T2 level, the

presumed location of the leak due to presence of a bone spur on CT and

the large corresponding CSF collection. This quickly led to resolution of

the headache and cranial nerve palsies, and later to the complete

resolution of his SDH. Through this case and review of the literature, the

authors demonstrated that directed cervical or thoracic EBP should be

considered for SIH as an alternative to the conventional lumbar EBP.

Ansel and co-workers (2016) stated that patients with a spontaneous

CSF leak, normally at a spinal level, typically present with low-pressure

headache. In refractory cases, EBP may be attempted. These

investigators evaluated the efficacy of lumbar EBP in spontaneous, low-

pressure headaches. They retrospectively analyzed notes of patients

who had EBP performed for SIH in a single-center. Information regarding

demographics, radiology and clinic follow-up was extracted from an

electronic patient record system. Questionnaires regarding outcome

were sent to patients a minimum of 6 months post-procedure. All patients

received EBP in the lumbar region irrespective of the site of CSF leak. A

total of 16 patients who underwent lumbar EBP were analyzed (11

women; mean age of 43 years). The site of CSF leak was evident in only

3/16 patients; 13 patients attended clinic follow-up; 3 reported complete

headache resolution, 4 reported improvement in intensity or frequency

and 6 described no change; 5 of 8 questionnaire respondents reported

reduction in pain, and in these responders, mean headache severity

improved from 9/10 to 3/10; 5 of 8 patients returning follow-up

questionnaires reported sustained improvement in headache symptoms.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

9/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

The authors concluded that EBP can provide sustained improvement in

headache symptoms in selected patients with SIH, but an untargeted

approach had a lower success rate than reported in other case series.

Rettenmaier and co-workers (2017) noted that SIH is a more common

than previously noted condition (1 to 2.5 per 50,000 persons) typically

caused by CSF leakage. Initial treatment involves conservative

therapies, but the mainstay of treatment for patients who fail conservative

management is EBP. Subdural hematoma (SDH) is a common

complication occurring with SIH, but its management remains

controversial. In this report, these researchers discussed a 62-year old

woman who presented with a 5-week history of orthostatic headaches

associated with nausea, emesis, and neck pain. Despite initial imaging

being negative, the patient later developed classic imaging evidence

characteristic of SIH; MRI was unrevealing for the source of the CSF

leak. Radionuclide cisternography showed possible CSF leak at the

right-sided C7 to T1 nerve root exit site. After failing a blind lumbar EBP,

subsequent targeted EBP at C7 to T1 improved the patient's symptoms.

Two days later she developed a new headache with imaging evidence of

worsening SDH with mid-line shift requiring burr hole drainage. This

yielded sustained symptomatic relief and resolution of previously

abnormal imaging findings at 2-month follow-up. These investigators

performed a literature review and revealed 174 cases of SIH complicated

by SDH. This revealed conflicting opinions concerning the management

of this condition. The authors concluded that although blind lumbar EBP

was often successful, targeted EBP had a lower rate of patients requiring

a 2nd EBP or other further treatment. On the other hand, targeted EBP

had a larger risk profile. Depending on the clinic situation, treatment of

the SDH via surgical evacuation may be necessary.

Staudt and colleagues (2018) noted that SIH is a progressive clinical

syndrome characterized by orthostatic headaches, nausea, emesis, and

occasionally focal neurological deficits. Rarely, SIH is associated with

neurocognitive changes. An EBP is commonly used to treat SIH when

conservative measures are inadequate, although some patients require

multiple EBP procedures or do not respond at all. Recently, the use of a

large-volume (LV) EBP has been described to treat occult leak sites in

treatment-refractory SIH. These investigators described the management

of a patient with profound neurocognitive decline associated with SIH,

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

10/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

who was refractory to conservative management and multiple

interventions. The authors described the successful use of an ultra-LV-

EBP of 120 ml across multiple levels, the largest volume reported in the

literature, and described the technical aspects of the procedure. This

procedure has resulted in dramatic and sustained symptom resolution.

He and co-workers (2018) noted that EBP is the mainstay of treatment for

refractory SIH. These researchers evaluated the treatment efficacy of

targeted EBP in refractory SIH. All patients underwent brain MRI with

contrast and heavily T2-weighted spine MRI. Whole spine CT

myelography with non-ionic contrast was performed in 46 patients, and

whole spine MR myelography with intra-thecal gadolinium was performed

in 119 patients. Targeted EBPs were placed in the prone position 1 or 2

vertebral levels below the CSF leaks. Repeat EBPs were offered at 1-

week intervals to patients with persistent symptoms, continued CSF

leakage, or with multiple leakage sites. Brain MRIs showed

pachymeningeal enhancement in 127 patients and subdural hematomas

in 32 patients; 152 patients had CSF leakages on heavily T2-weighted

spine MRIs; CSF leaks were also detected on CT and MR myelography

in 43 and 111 patients, respectively. Good recovery was achieved in all

patients after targeted EBP. No serious complications occurred in

patients treated with targeted EBP during the 1 to 7 years of follow-up.

The authors concluded that targeted and repeat EBPs are rational

choices for treatment of refractory SIH caused by CSF leakage.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Spontaneous intracranial

hypotension: Treatment and prognosis” (Sun-Edelstein and Lay, 2018b)

states that “The most conservative treatment for spontaneous intracranial

hypotension is avoidance of the upright position, with strict bed rest and

the possible addition of analgesics … We suggest epidural blood patch

(EBP) for patients with spontaneous intracranial hypotension who fulfill

any of the following conditions (Grade 2C)”:

An aggressive precipitating injury, a history of connective tissue

disease, or joint hypermobility

Headache unresponsive to a reasonable period of conservative

treatment (e.g., bed rest and oral analgesics for 1 to 2 weeks)

Severe headache or other disabling symptoms, regardless of

duration

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

11/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Symptomatic for 2 weeks or longer at the time of diagnosis.

Cheema et al (2023) created a multi-disciplinary consensus clinical

guideline for best practice in the diagnosis, investigation, and

management of SIH due to CSF leak based on current evidence and

consensus from a multi-disciplinary specialist interest group (SIG). A 29-

member SIG was established, with members from neurology,

neuroradiology, anesthetics, neurosurgery, and patient representatives.

The scope and purpose of the guideline were agreed by the SIG by

consensus. The SIG then developed guideline statements for a series of

question topics using a modified Delphi process. This process was

supported by a systematic literature review, surveys of patients and

healthcare professionals and review by several international experts on

SIH. The SIG stated that SIH and its differential diagnoses should be

considered in any patient presenting with orthostatic headache; 1st-line

imaging should be MRI of the brain with contrast and the whole spine.

First-line treatment is non-targeted EBP, which should be performed as

early as possible. The SIG provided criteria for performing myelography

depending on the spine MRI result and response to EBP, and it outlined

principles of treatments. Recommendations for conservative

management, symptomatic treatment of headache and management of

complications of SIH were also provided.

EBP Treatment of Post-Dural Puncture Tinnitus

Jia and Fadhlillah (2018) stated that audiometric disturbances are

recognized as potential complications after spinal or epidural anesthesia;

however, incidences of tinnitus occur less frequently. These researchers

reported the case of a patient with severe bilateral tinnitus post-lumbar

puncture who was treated with EBP. Subject was a 40-yearold ASA I

woman (a medically fit patient with no known medical problem) presented

with ongoing bilateral severe tinnitus for 6 days after a lumbar puncture.

Venous blood (18 ml) was injected into the epidural space using a 16-G

needle. The patient completed the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory (THI)

Questionnaire before EBP, 3 hours, 24 hours and 1-month post-

procedure. An audiogram was also conducted before and 1 month after

EBP. The patient scored 84 (grade 5) on the THI before EBP; 3 hours

post-procedure, her score improved to 16 (grade 1), with complete

resolution by 24 hours. Audiogram revealed a low-frequency mild

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

12/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

sensorineural hearing loss in the left ear prior to the procedure. By her 1-

month follow-up, her hearing was back to normal. The authors concluded

that EBP is an effective treatment for post-dural puncture tinnitus. Its

effects are instantaneous and complete resolution is achieved by 24

hours. These preliminary findings need to be validated by well-designed

studies.

Epidural Fibrin Glue Patching for the Treatment of Post-Dural

Puncture Headache

Wong and Monroe (2017) stated that EBP is the gold standard for the

treatment of PDPH when conservative treatments have failed to provide

any relief. However, alternative therapies are lacking when EBP

persistently fails to improve symptoms. This case described a woman

who developed PDPH secondary to accidental dural puncture during a

spinal cord stimulator trial. She was successfully treated with epidural

fibrin glue patch after multiple trials of EBP. The authors concluded that

percutaneous injection of fibrin glue to seal the dural defect demonstrated

promising outcomes for both immediate and long-lasting resolution of

persistent PDPH in this patient. They stated that in the event of EBP

failure, epidural fibrin glue patching may be a reasonable alternative for

the treatment of persistent PDPH. These preliminary findings need to be

validated by well-designed studies.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Post-lumbar puncture headache”

(Sun-Edelstein and Lay, 2018a) states that “Epidural patching with fibrin

glue at the site of the CSF leak has been used successfully in small

numbers of patients. Anecdotal evidence suggests that this method is

effective, and thereby avoids surgery, in about 1/3 of patients who have

failed epidural blood patch treatment. Further evidence of benefit in

larger studies is needed before this technique can be routinely

recommended”.

Epidural Autologous Platelet-Rich-Plasma Patching for the Treatment of Post-Dural Puncture Headache

Gunaydin and colleagues (2017) performed epidural patching using

platelet-rich-plasma (PRP), which has the potential to regenerate and

heal tissues via degranulation of platelets, in a 34-year old parturient

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

13/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

suffering from persistent PDPH after failed EBP. After her admission to

the authors’ unit, these researchers re-confirmed the clinical and

radiologic diagnosis of PDPH. Cranial MRI with contrast showed diffuse

pachymeningeal thickening and contrast enhancement with enlarged

pituitary consistent with intracranial hypotension. Clinical and radiological

improvements were observed 1 week after epidural patching using

autologous PRP. The authors recommended using autologous PRP for

epidural patching in patients with incomplete recovery after standard EBP

as a novel successful approach. These preliminary findings need to be

validated by well-designed studies.

Transforaminal Epidural Blood Patching

Amrhein and co-workers (2016) noted that EBP treatment of spontaneous

intracranial hypotension arising from ventral CSF leaks can be difficult

secondary to challenges in achieving ventral spread of patching material.

Ina retrospective study, these researchers examined the safety profile

and technical success rates of direct needle placement into the ventral

epidural space via a posterior transforaminal approach. They reviewed

consecutive CT fluoroscopy-guided EBP from June 2013 through July

2015. Cases were included if a posterior transforaminal approach was

taken to place the needle directly in the ventral epidural space. Rates of

technical success (defined as contrast in the spinal canal ventral epidural

space) and optimal epidurogram (defined as contrast spreading into or

beyond the middle third of the spinal canal ventral epidural space) were

determined. Factors influencing these rates were assessed. All

complications, inadvertent intra-vascular injections, and intra-thecal

punctures were recorded. A total of 72 ventral epidural blood patches

were identified; immediate technical success was achieved in 95.8 % and

an optimal epidurogram in 47.2 %. Needle position within the spinal

canal ventral epidural space was associated with obtaining an optimal

epidurogram (p = 0.005). Inadvertent intra-vascular injection was

identified in 29.3 % of cases, but all were venous. There were no

inadvertent intra-thecal punctures or complications. The authors

concluded that direct needle placement in the ventral epidural space via a

transforaminal approach for treatment of ventral CSF leaks has an

excellent technical success rate and safety profile. This technique can be

considered as a therapeutic option in selected patients with ventral CSF

leaks for whom traditional techniques are unsuccessful.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

14/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Choi and associates (2019) stated that post-dural puncture headache

(PDPH) is a leak of CSF that lowers intra-cranial pressure and usually

presents as a positional headache. If conservative treatments are not

successful, EBP is the gold standard of treatment for dural puncture. The

interlaminar approach is the most commonly used technique for an EBP.

These investigators described a patient who was treated with a

transforaminal EBP for PDPH following an acupuncture procedure on his

lower back after 2 EBPs using an interlaminar approach had failed. The

patient underwent an acupuncture therapy for management of chronic

low back pain (LBP) due to post-laminectomy syndrome. After the

procedure, the patient had a severe headache and the conservative

treatment was ineffective. The 2 interlaminar EBPs (at the L2 to L3 and

L3 to L4 levels) failed. These researchers performed transforaminal EBP

at the L3 to L4 and L4 to L5 levels on the left side, the site of leakage in

the MRI myelogram. His symptoms finally subsided without

complication. The authors concluded that this case demonstrated that

targeted transforaminal EBP was a therapeutic option for the treatment

PDPH when EBP using an interlaminar approach was ineffective or when

a ventral or far-lateral CSF leak was identified with imaging studies.

Choi and colleagues (2020) noted that EBP is a vital tool in the treatment

of PDPH. Traditional interlaminar epidural needle insertion into the

epidural space, however, may be challenging due to anatomical

variations. As an alternative method, these researchers successfully

performed an EBP via a transforaminal approach. In this single-case

study, a mid-50-year old man with multi-level spinal fusion developed

PDPH following a failed spinal cord stimulator electrode placement. A

transforaminal EBP was carried out by injecting a total of 8-ml of

autologous blood into the neuroforamen at the L1 to L2 level bilaterally.

The patient's positional headache resolved immediately after the

procedure. The authors concluded that this was the 1st case reported of

a transforaminal EBP in a patient with diffuse epidural adhesive fibrosis

secondary to multi-level laminectomies and spinal fusion. This case

report highlighted potential risks and benefits of this novel technique and

also discussed its therapeutic mechanism of action. These researchers

believed that a transforaminal EBP should be considered in patients who

are poor candidates for the traditional interlaminar EBP.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

15/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Real-Time Pressure-Sensing Epidural Guidance System

On July 6, 2022, the American Medical Association (AMA) issued a new

technology-specific Category III Current Procedural Terminology (CPT®)

to report the use of the CompuFlo Epidural system (Milestone Scientific,

Inc.). The CompuFlo Epidural system is a real-time pressure sensing

guidance system designed to accurately identify the location of the

needle in real-time. According to the company, the clinical and safety

benefits of the CompuFlo Epidural System are supported by numerous

published studies showing reductions in epidural punctures and

complication rates (yahoo!life, 2022).

Gebhard and colleagues (2019) conducted a study to compare

continuous, quantitative, real-time, needle-tip pressure sensing using a

novel computer-controlled epidural space (ES) identification technology

(CompuFlo Epidural Computer Controlled Anesthesia System [CEI];

Milestone Scientific, Livingston, NJ) to fluoroscopy (FC) and traditional

loss of resistance (LOR) for lumbar ES identification in labor and delivery

(L&D) and chronic pain (CP) management. The study was a prospective

randomized controlled non-inferiority trial consisting of 400 patients in

total. Patients in the CP management arm (n=240) were scheduled to

receive a lumbar epidural steroid injection and had their ES identified

either with FC or with needle-tip pressure measurement. Female patients

in the L&D arm (n=160) underwent lumbar epidural catheter placements

and were randomized to either LOR or needle-tip pressure measurement.

The primary outcome was successful ES identification which was protocol

defined. Secondary outcomes included the performance of the procedure

using one attempt, the absence of accidental dural puncture (ADP),

subject-reported adequate pain relief 45 minutes after dosing of the

epidural catheter (EAPR 45), and the duration of the ES identification

procedure (in minutes). Non-inferiority of needle-tip pressure

management was observed in relation to FC where pain management

patients showed a 100% success rate of ES identification with both

methodologies (OR, 1.1; 97.27% Confidence Interval [CI], 0.52–8.74;

p=0.021 for noninferiority), and L&D patients experienced a non-inferior

success rate with the novel technology (97.1% vs 91%; OR, 3.3; 97.27%

CI, 0.62–21.54; p=0.019) using a a priori noninferiority delta of 0.50. The

study concluded that objective lumbar ES identification using continuous,

quantitative, real-time, needle-tip pressure measurement with the

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

16/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

CompuFlo Epidural Computer Controlled Anesthesia System

demonstrated non-inferior success rates in comparison to FC and LOR

for CP management and L&D, respectively.

Hidalgo (2019) conducted an open, prospective, single operator study to

®

report the clinical experience with the CompuFlo Epidural Instrument.

®

Epidural block was given with the CompuFlo Epidural Instrument in all

consecutive patients receiving an epidural or thoracic block under the

investigator’s care over a two year time frame. The epidural needle was

determined to have reached the epidural space marked by an increase in

pressure (accompanied by an increase of the pitch of the audible tone)

and then followed by a sudden and sustained drop in pressure of greater

than 5 seconds accompanied by a sudden decrease of the pitch of the

audible tone with resultant formation of a low and stable pressure plateau

on the instrument’s visual display. Outcomes evaluation included:

incidence of accidental dural puncture, success of anesthesia, procedure

time, volume of saline used for the epidural procedure, number of

epidural attempts to reach the epidural space, number of needle

redirections, and the operator’s agreement with his tactile sensation of

®

loss of resistance and the CompuFlo pattern. The results for the 600

total cases studied noted success with all epidural blocks and no

accidental dural punctures. Ninety-one percent of cases involved the

correct identification of epidural space on the first attempt, and in 95% of

cases there was a perfect correlation between an operator’s tactile

®

sensations and the CompuFlo recordings as judged by the operator.

®

This study concluded that epidural blocks via the CompuFlo Epidural

Instrument were associated with a very high success rate regardless of

clinical setting (obstetrical, surgical or blood patch intervention) or at

which vertebral level (thoracic or epidural) were done. Additionally, there

was zero incidence of any accidental dural puncture.

Capogna et al (2020) conducted a prospective, simulation study to verify

®

whether the high sensitivity of the CompuFlo epidural system could aid

the anesthesiologist to identify the epidural space very early, thereby,

limiting the extension of the Tuohy needle into the epidural space. This

study evaluated the Tuohy needle extension through a simulated

ligamentum flavum during epidural procedure performed by 52 expert

®

anesthesiologists utilizing the CompuFlo epidural instrument or their

standard loss of resistance to saline technique (LORT). The results

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

17/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

showed the mean (SD) needle extension length as 3.90 (3.71) mm in the

standard technique group and 0.68 (0.46) mm in the CompuFlo® group

®

(p<000001). The CompuFlo group presented with extremely reduced

variability of the data (F test 0.01) showing that results obtained with it are

highly predictable. It was concluded that the needle arrested prematurely

®

when using CompuFlo to puncture a simulated ligamentum flavum in

comparison to traditional LORT.

Babazade and colleagues (2022) conducted a study on cost-minimization

analysis of real-time pressure sensing technology in parturient requesting

labor epidural analgesia. The cost-minimization analysis involved total

cost estimation, from the hospital perspective, for the hospital stay for

delivery and readmission for epidural blood patch (EBP), if any. Patients

were categorized into two groups by the presence of epidural

replacement. Epidural placement success was determined as baby

delivered without epidural replacement or additional analgesia technique

or medications. Each patient group was further categorized into three

groups: 1) No post-dural puncture headache (PDPH) or EBP; 2) With

PDPH but no EBP; 3) With EBP. Patients receiving multiple epidural

procedures for epidural anesthesia during hospitalization were

considered to have epidural replacement. PDPH following epidural

anesthesia was identified using the International Classification of

Diseases (ICD), 10th Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM) codes

074.5 and 0.89. Adjustment of all costs to the same time period (February

2019) was performed using the Consumer Price Index for medical care.

Cost-minimization analysis compared real-time pressure sensing

technology and traditional loss-of-resistance (LOR) technique. Cost-

estimation included 4483 deliveries among 4353 parturient. In the 4483

deliveries, 469 (10.5%) had epidural replacement and 101 (2.25%) had

post-dural puncture headache. To no surprise, patients who had epidural

replacement and epidural blood patch incurred the highest cost, while

those without, incurred the lowest cost (median cost $25,279.51 vs.

$16,272.40). Real-time pressure sensing technology costs were about

504 US dollars less per hospital stay on average compared to the

traditional LOR technique. Based on the same cost estimate for delivery

and complication treatment on both arms in each of the six scenarios,

real-time pressure sensing technology achieved a cost savings due to the

lower likelihood of epidural replacement.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

18/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Treatment of Suspected CSF Leak

Carroll et al (2024) noted that spinal CSF leaks result in spontaneous

intracranial hypotension (SIH). While 3rd edition International

Classification of Headache Disorders (ICHD-3) criteria necessitate

imaging confirmation or low opening pressure (OP) for SIH diagnosis,

their sensitivity may be limited. The diagnostic criteria of ICHD-3 can be

applied already on presentation or as soon after as the underlying

disorder is confirmed. Criterion A is presence of the headache; criterion B

is presence of the causative disorder; and criterion C is the evidence of

causation. These investigators offered EBPs to patients with symptoms

suggestive of SIH, with and without a documented low OP or confirmed

leak on imaging. In a prospective, cohort study, these researchers

examined the effectiveness of this strategy. This study employed a

nested case-control design including all patients who presented to a

tertiary headache clinic with clinical symptoms of SIH who completed

study measures both before and after receiving an EBP between August

2016 and November 2018. The mean duration of symptoms was 8.7 ±

8.1 years. Of 85 patients assessed, 69 did not meet ICHD-3 criteria for

SIH. At an average of 521 days after the initial EBP, this ICHD-3-negative

subgroup exhibited significant improvements in Patient-Reported

Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Global Physical

Health score of +3.3 (95 % CI: 1.5 to 5.1), PROMIS Global Mental Health

score of +1.8 (95 % CI: 0.0 to 3.5), Headache Impact Test (HIT)-6 head

pain score of -3.8 (95 % CI: -5.7 to -1.8), Neck Disability Index (NDI) of

4.8 (95 % CI: -9.0 to -0.6) and PROMIS Fatigue of -2.3 (95 % CI: -4.1 to

0.6); 54 % of ICHD-3-negative patients achieved clinically meaningful

improvements in PROMIS Global Physical Health; and 45% in HIT-6

scores. Pain relief following lying flat before treatment was strongly

associated with sustained clinically meaningful improvement in global

physical health at an average of 521 days (OR 1.39, 95 % CI: 1.1 to 1.79;

p < 0.003). ICHD-3-positive patients showed high rates of response and

previously unreported, treatable levels of fatigue and cognitive deficits.

The authors concluded that patients who did not conform to the ICHD-3

criteria for SIH showed moderate rates of sustained, clinically meaningful

improvements in global physical health, global mental health, neck pain,

fatigue, and head pain following EBP therapy. Pre-treatment

improvement in head pain when lying flat was associated with later,

sustained improvement after EBP therapy among patients who did not

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

19/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

meet the ICHD-3 criteria. Moreover, these investigators stated that

further research is needed to confirm these findings. Classification of

Evidence = IV.

The authors stated that this study had several drawbacks. First, in the

absence of a control group given sham patches, these researchers could

not exclude non-specific treatment effects as responsible for some of the

improvement seen. Furthermore, it was possible that some portion of the

improved patients had a primary headache disorder and the improvement

was not related to the EBP. However, patients' pre-patch relief when lying

flat was strongly associated with the subsequent likelihood of clinically

meaningful benefit over a year after patching. In addition, the positive

effects of patching appeared to increase, rather than diminish, over

extended time periods and repeated patching. This pattern among

responders strengthened a causal inference that patches had a specific

therapeutic effect. Second, non-random completion of a post-treatment

questionnaire (non-participation bias) could limit generalizability to

outside groups of patients with orthostatic headache. These investigators

compared available baseline measures of the patients who did not

complete follow-up with those who did and found no significant

differences, suggesting the participating cohort was representative of the

larger group of all patients who received patches after completing

baseline measures. Third, a recent report (Callen et al, 2023) suggested

that 10 % of patients with an orthostatic headache and negative brain and

spine MRI later had a CSF-venous fistulas (CVFs) identifiable with lateral

decubitus digital subtraction myelogram -- a technique not available at the

time of these data acquisition. These findings would suggest that 10 %

of these researchers’ subset of patients who did not meet the ICHD-3

criteria might have had an undiagnosed CVF and might have responded

to epidural patching on that basis. Fourth, HIT-6 head pain scores

improved to 64.1 ± 8.23 (p < 0.001) at a mean 521 days after the 1st

patch, and these scores after patching were still in the severe range on

average. Additionally, differing estimates of the within-person clinically

meaningful change in the HIT-6 existed, and would yield different

calculated rates of meaningful responders. Fifth, owing to the exploratory

analysis of this project, p values were not adjusted for multiple testing;

increasing the risk that any one of the significant findings reflected a type

I error due to multiple testing; therefore, significant results must be

interpreted with caution and bear repetition.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

20/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Cervical Epidural Blood Patch for the Treatment of Spontaneous

Intracranial Hypotension

Ghatge et al (2024) noted that lumbar EBP is not successful in all cases

of CSF leak, especially in the cervico-thoracic region. Ina retrospective

study, these investigators analyzed the findings of a cohort of patients

who had undergone computed tomography (CT)-guided cervical EBP for

the treatment of SIH due to CSF leak in the cervical region. These

researchers collected data from March 2009 to 2020. The inclusion

criteria were clinical syndrome associated with CSF leak, headache

coming on shortly after assuming the erect position and relief achieved by

lying down, CT myelography evidence of CSF leak in the cervical region,

and patient not responding to conservative management for 7 days.

Exclusion criteria were patients with bleeding diathesis and infection.

There were 6 women and 4 men; ages ranged from 32 to 57 years, with

an average of 42. On presentation, all subjects underwent contrast-

enhanced MRI and CT myelography. Cervical EBP was carried out under

CT guidance. Assessment of headache was conducted on a 10-point

numerical rating scale (NRS) before and after the procedure. Results

were categorized into complete relief, partial relief, and no relief

categories. A total of 9 out of 10 patients were completely recovered; and

1 patient was partially recovered. The average NRS scale was 9.6 before

treatment, which was lowered to 0.4 following EBP. No neurological or

vascular complications were observed. The authors concluded that CT-

guided cervical EBP was an optimum and effective way for the treatment

of SIH as a consequence of a leak in the cervical region. It exhibited a

higher success rate than lumbar EBP. Moreover, these researchers

stated that prospective RCTs of cervical versus lumbar EBP are needed

to validate these preliminary findings.

Su et al (2025) stated that EBP is a minimally invasive and effective

treatment for SIH); however, cervical EBP for SIH has little attention.

These investigators examined the treatment the safety and effectiveness

of cervical EBP in the treatment of SIH. A total of 59 cases of intractable

SIH were examined by CT-guided cervical EBP at the Chinese PLA

General Hospital from August 2014 to March 2024. The mean age of the

59 patients at symptom onset was 40.8 ± 9.5 years; 54/59 (91.5 %)

patients experienced orthostatic headache. Pre-operative spine T2 scans

with extensive fluid collection at the upper cervical region in 43/46 (93.5

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

21/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

%); 45/59 (76.3 %) patients had symptomatic relief with initial cervical

EBP, and 14/59 (23.7 %) patients received further cervical EBPs. In the

first 1 to 3 days following the EBP procedure, 11 (18.6 %) patients

reported pain at the puncture site, and 15 (25.4 %) experienced neck

pain. No other complications were observed during or after the

procedure. At the latest follow-up, all patients showed good recovery.

The mean follow-up was 28.9 ± 22.7 months. The authors concluded

that CT-guided cervical EBP was a safe and effective treatment for

patients with intractable SIH, especially in patients who had extensive

fluid collection at the upper cervical region.

References

The above policy is based on the following references:

1. Amrhein TJ, Befera NT, Gray L, Kranz PG. CT ﬂuoroscopy-guided

blood patching of ventral CSF leaks by direct needle placement in

the ventral epidural space using a transforaminal approach.

AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2016;37(10):1951-1956.

2. Amrhein TJ, Kranz PG. Spontaneous intracranial hypotension:

Imaging in diagnosis and treatment. Radiol Clin North Am.

2019;57(2):439-451.

3. Amrhein TJ, Kranz PG, Cantrell S, et al. Eﬃcacy of epidural blood

patching or surgery in spontaneous intracranial hypotension: An

evidence map protocol. Syst Rev. 2022;11(1):116.

4. Amrhein TJ, Williams JW, Jr., Gray L, et al. Eﬃcacy of epidural

blood patching or surgery in spontaneous intracranial

hypotension: A systematic review and evidence map. AJNR Am J

Neuroradiol. 2023;44(6):730-739.

5. Ansel S, Rae A, Tyagi A. Eﬃcacy of epidural blood patches for

spontaneous low-pressure headaches: A case series. J R Coll

Physicians Edinb. 2016;46(4):234-237.

6. Babazade R, Lin Y-I., Valles GH, et al. Cost-minimization analysis

of the continuous real-time pressure sensing technology in

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

22/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

parturients requesting labor epidural analgesia, Braz J

Anesthesiol. 2022;S0104-0014(22)00076-8.

7. Boonmak P, Boonmak S. Epidural blood patching for preventing

and treating post-dural puncture headache. Cochrane Database

Syst Rev. 2010;(1):CD001791.

8. Callen AL, Jones LC, Timpone VM, et al. Factors predictive of

treatment success in CT-guided ﬁbrin occlusion of CSF-venous

ﬁstulas: A multicenter retrospective cross-sectional study. AJNR

Am J Neuroradiol. 2023;44(11):1332-1338.

9. Capogna E, Coccoluto A, Velardo M. Epidural needle extension

through the ligamentum ﬂavum using the standard versus the

CompuFlo®-assisted loss of resistance to saline technique: A

simulation study. Anesthesiol Res Pract. 2020;2020:9651627.

10. Carroll I, Han L, Zhang N, et al. Long-term epidural patching

outcomes and predictors of beneﬁt in patients with suspected

CSF leak nonconforming to ICHD-3 criteria. Neurology.

2024;102(12):e209449.

11. Cheema S, Anderson J, Angus-Leppan H, et al. Multidisciplinary

consensus guideline for the diagnosis and management of

spontaneous intracranial hypotension. J Neurol Neurosurg

Psychiatry. 2023;94(10):835-843.

12. Choi HR, Fuller B, Bottros MM. Successful transforaminal

epidural blood patch in a patient with multilevel spinal fusion.

Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2020;45(9):746-749.

13. Choi YN, Kang SJ, Joo JD, et al. Targeted transforaminal epidural

blood patch for postdural puncture headache in patients with

postlaminectomy syndrome. Case Rep Neurol Med.

2019;2019:1968314.

14. Gebhard RE, Moeller-Bertram T, Dobecki D, et al. Objective

epidural space identiﬁcation using continuous real-time pressure

sensing technology: A randomized controlled comparison with

ﬂuoroscopy and traditional loss of resistance. Anesth Analg.

2019;129(5):1319-1327.

15. Ghatge S, Mehta R, Shah AB, Surya N. Spontaneous intracranial

hypotension: Role of computed tomography-guided cervical

epidural blood patch. J Assoc Physicians India. 2024;72(8):48-51.

16. Girgis F, Shing M, Duplessis S. Thoracic epidural blood patch for

spontaneous intracranial hypotension: Case report and review of

the literature. Turk Neurosurg. 2015;25(2):320-325.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

23/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

17. Gottschalk A. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid leakage. Indications, technique

and results of treatment with a blood patch. Radiologe.

2015;55(6):471-478.

18. Gunaydin B, Acar M, Emmez G, et al. Epidural patch with

autologous platelet rich plasma: A novel approach. J Anesth.

2017;31(6):907-910.

19. He FF, Li L, Liu MJ, et al. Targeted epidural blood patch treatment

for refractory spontaneous intracranial hypotension in China. J

Neurol Surg B Skull Base. 2018;79(3):217-223.

20. Hidalgo G. Epidural space indentiﬁcation using continuous real-

®

time pressure sensing technology (CompuFlo ): A report of 600

consecutive cases. Open J Anesthesiol. 2019;9:189-195.

21. Jia W, Fadhlillah F. Blood patch for the treatment of post-dural

puncture tinnitus. SAGE Open Med Case Rep.

2018;6:2050313X18759445.

22. Kapoor SG, Ahmed S. Cervical epidural blood patch -- A literature

review. Pain Med. 2015;16(10):1897-1904.

23. Milestone Scientiﬁc, Inc. American Medical Association issues

®

technology-speciﬁc CPT code for Milestion Scientiﬁc's CompuFlo

epidural system. yahoo!life, July 6,

2022. https://www.yahoo.com/lifestyle/american-medical-

association-issues-technology-150000368.html. Accessed

February 1, 2023.

24. No authors listed. Prevention is key but an epidural blood patch

is standard treatment in postdural puncture headache. Drug

Ther Perspect. 2001;17(5). Available at:

https://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/406474_6.

25. Piechowiak EI, Aeschimann B, Hani L, et al. Epidural blood

patching in spontaneous intracranial hypotension -- Do we really

seal the leak? Clin Neuroradiol. 2023;33(1):211-218.

26. Ranganath YS. CompuFlo thoracic epidural study.

ClinicalTrials.gov Identiﬁer: NCT03826186. Bethesda, MD:

National Library of Medicine; updated October 19, 2022.

Available at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03826186.

Accessed February 1, 2023.

27. Rettenmaier LA, Park BJ, Holland MT, et al. Value of targeted

epidural blood patch and management of subdural hematoma in

spontaneous intracranial hypotension: Case report and review of

the literature. World Neurosurg. 2017;97:27-38.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

24/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

28. Roberts JM, Peterson VE, Heran MKS. Percutaneous CT-guided

epidural ﬁbrin sealant injection for refractory pediatric post-

dural puncture headache. Pediatr Radiol. 2020;50(8):1156-1158.

29. Signorelli F, Caccavella VM, Giordano M, et al. A systematic

review and meta-analysis of factors aﬀecting the outcome of the

epidural blood patching in spontaneous intracranial

hypotension. Neurosurg Rev. 2021;44(6):3079-3085.

30. Staudt MD, Pasternak SH, Sharma M, et al. Multilevel, ultra-large-

volume epidural blood patch for the treatment of neurocognitive

decline associated with spontaneous intracranial hypotension:

Case report. J Neurosurg. 2018;129(1):205-210.

31. Su H, Lan X, Cao Y, et al. Cervical epidural blood patch treatment

is a choice for spontaneous intracranial hypotension. Technol

Health Care. 2025;33(1):567-575.

32. Suescun H, Austin P, Gabaldon D. Nonpharmacologic neuraxial

interventions for prophylaxis of postdural puncture headache in

the obstetric patient. AANA J. 2016;84(1):15-22.

33. Sun-Edelstein C, Lay CL. Post-lumbar puncture headache.

UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed

April 2018a.

34. Sun-Edelstein C, Lay CL. Spontaneous intracranial hypotension:

Treatment and prognosis. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham,

MA: UpToDate; reviewed April 2018b.

35. Turnbull DK, Shepherd DB. Post-dural puncture headache:

Pathogenesis, prevention and treatment. Br J Anaesth.

2003;91(5):718-729.

36. Wong K, Monroe BR. Successful treatment of postdural puncture

headache using epidural ﬁbrin glue patch after persistent failure

of epidural blood patches. Pain Pract. 2017;17(7):956-960.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

25/26

10/25/25, 12:00 PM

Epidural Injection Technologies - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist in administering plan benefits and

constitute neither offers of coverage nor medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only a partial, general description of plan or

program benefits and does not constitute a contract. Aetna does not provide health care services and, therefore, cannot guarantee any

results or outcomes. Participating providers are independent contractors in private practice and are neither employees nor agents of Aetna

or its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for medical advice and treatment of members. This Clinical Policy Bulletin may be

updated and therefore is subject to change.

Copyright © 2001-2025 Aetna Inc.

Language services can be provided by calling the number on your member ID card. For additional language assistance: Español Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Pусский ةيبرعلا Kreyòl Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch ⽇本語 یسراف Other

Languages…

(http://www.aetna.com/individuals-families/contact-aetna/information-in-other-languages.html)

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/900_999/0934.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

26/26