10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

-->

(https://www.aetna.com/)

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty

Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins

Clinical Policy Bulletins

Number: 0005

Table Of Contents

Policy History

Policy

Applicable CPT / HCPCS / ICD-10 Codes

Last Review

Background

10/24/2025

References

Effective: 07/31/1995

Next Review: 01/08/2026

Review History

Deﬁnitions

Policy

Additional Information

Scope of Policy

Clinical Policy Bulletin

This Clinical Policy Bulletin addresses septoplasty and rhinoplasty.

Notes

I. Medical Necessity

A. Septoplasty

1. Aetna considers septoplasty medically necessary when any

of the following clinical criteria is met:

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

1/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

a. Asymptomatic septal deformity that prevents access to

other intranasal areas when such access is required to

perform medical necessary surgical procedures (e.g.,

ethmoidectomy); or

b. Documented recurrent sinusitis felt to be due to a

deviated septum not relieved by appropriate medical

and antibiotic therapy; or

c. Recurrent epistaxis (nose-bleeds) related to a septal

deformity; or

d. Septal deviation causing continuous nasal airway

obstruction resulting in nasal breathing diﬃculty not

responding to 4 or more weeks of appropriate medical

therapy; or

e. When done in association with cleft palate repair.

2. Aetna considers extracorporeal septoplasty medically

necessary for initial correction of an extremely deviated

nasal septum that can not adequately be corrected with an

intranasal approach, for members who meet criteria for

septoplasty listed above.

Aetna considers septoplasty experimental, investigational, or

unproven for all other indications (e.g., allergic rhinitis) because

its eﬀectiveness other than the ones listed above has not been

established.

B. Rhinoplasty

1. Aetna considers rhinoplasty medically necessary only in the

following limited circumstances:

a. When it is being performed to correct a nasal deformity

secondary to congenital cleft lip and/or palate or for

removal of a nasal dermoid; or

b. Upon individual case review, to correct chronic non-

septal nasal airway obstruction from vestibular stenosis

(collapsed internal valves) due to trauma, disease, or

congenital defect*, when all of the following criteria are

met:

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

2/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

i. Prolonged, persistent obstructed nasal breathing;

and

ii. Physical examination conﬁrming moderate to severe

vestibular obstruction; and

iii. Airway obstruction will not respond to septoplasty

and turbinectomy alone; and

iv. Nasal airway obstruction is causing signiﬁcant

symptoms (e.g., chronic rhinosinusitis, diﬃculty

breathing); and

v. Obstructive symptoms persist despite conservative

management for 4 weeks or greater, which includes,

where appropriate, nasal steroids or

immunotherapy; and

vi. Photographs demonstrate an external nasal

deformity; and

vii. There is signiﬁcant obstruction of one or both nares),

documented by nasal endoscopy, computed

tomography (CT) scan or other appropriate imaging

modality; or

c. When rhinoplasty for nasal airway obstruction is

performed as an integral part of a medically necessary

septoplasty and there is documentation of gross nasal

obstruction on the same side as the septal deviation .

Documentation of criterion b or c should include:

a. The duration and degree of symptoms related to nasal

obstruction, such as chronic rhinosinusitis, mouth

breathing, etc.; and

b. The results of conservative management of symptoms;

and

c. If there is an external nasal deformity, pre-operative

photographs showing the standard 4-way view: anterior-

posterior, right and left lateral views, and base of nose

(also known as worm's eye view conﬁrming vestibular

stenosis; this view is from the bottom of nasal septum

pointing upwards); and

d. Relevant history of accidental or surgical trauma,

congenital defect, or disease (e.g., Wegener’s

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

3/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

granulomatosis, choanal atresia, nasal malignancy,

abscess, septal infection with saddle deformity, or

congenital deformity); and

e. Results of nasal endoscopy, CT or other appropriate

imaging modality documenting degree of nasal

obstruction.

C. Nasal Septal Button for Non-Surgical Closure of Septal

Perforations

Aetna considers nasal septal button for non-surgical closure of

septal perforations medically necessary.

D. Repair of Nasal Septal Perforations

Aetna considers repair of nasal septal perforations medically

necessary.

E. Intranasal Excision or Destruction

Aetna considers excision or destruction of intranasal lesions

using an internal approach medically necessary for the

following indications:

1. Cautery or arterial ligation for recurrent epistaxis refractory

to initial local measures;

2. Necrotizing lesions (from infection, vasculitis, or drug

abuse);

3. Removal of benign masses (e.g., inverted papilloma, juvenile

angioﬁbroma, nasal glial heterotopias, dermoids, pyogenic

granuloma, polyps) causing obstructionl;

4. Removal of isolated intra-nasal malignancies (e.g.,

intranasal basal cell carcinoma);

5. Removal of locally aggressive or destructive lesions such as

schwannomas, ﬁbro-osseous lesions, pleomorphic

adenomas, and hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia;

6. Removal of other masses (excluding septal swell bodies)

causing obstruction, airway compromise or pain interfering

with quality of life; or

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

4/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

7. Removal of retained foreign bodies not amenable to

external removal.

II. Experimental, Investigational, or Unproven

The following procedures are considered experimental,

investigational, or unproven because the eﬀectiveness of these

approaches has not been established:

A. Ablation, excision or destruction of septal swell bodies for the

treatment of chronic rhinitis, chronic sinusitis, or nasal

obstruction;

B. Balloon septoplasty for the treatment for nasal fracture and

septal deviation;

C. Extracorporeal septoplasty for revision of deviated septum;

D. Nasal valve suspension for the repair of nasal valve collapse;

E. Pyriform aperture reduction (pyriform turbinoplasty) for the

treatment of nasal obstruction;

F. Use of absorbable nasal implant (e.g., the Spirox Latera

Absorbable Nasal Implant) for nasal valve reconstruction,

treatment of nasal valve weakness, and for all other

indications;

G. Use of blood products (e.g., concentrated growth factor or

platelet-rich ﬁbrin) with diced cartilage in rhinoplasty;

H. Use of concentrated growth factor extracted from blood

plasma for repair of nasal septal mucosal defect following

rhinoplasty.

III. Cosmetic

Aetna considers rhinoplasty cosmetic for all other indications.

Note: See CPB 0031 - Cosmetic Surgery (0031.html) for details on

exceptions to the cosmetic surgery exclusion. In addition, please

check beneﬁt plan descriptions for details.

IV. Related Policies

CPB 0031 - Cosmetic Surgery (0031.html)

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

5/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Applicable CPT / HCPCS / ICD-10 Codes

Septoplasty:

Code

Code Description

CPT codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Septoplasty or submucous resection, with or without cartilage

30520

scoring, contouring or replacement with graft

Septal or other intranasal dermatoplasty (does not include

30620

obtaining graft)

CPT codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Ablation, soft tissue of inferior turbinates, unilateral or bilateral,

30801

any method (eg, electrocautery, radiofrequency ablation, or

tissue volume reduction); superficial

Ablation, soft tissue of inferior turbinates, unilateral or bilateral,

30802

any method (eg, electrocautery, radiofrequency ablation, or

tissue volume reduction); intramural (ie, submucosal)

ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Chronic sinusitis [due to deviated septum not relieved by

J32.0 - J32.9

appropriate medical and antibiotic therapy]

Deviated nasal septum [causing continuous nasal airway

J34.2

obstruction resulting in nasal breathing difficulty not responding

to appropriate medical therapy]

Other and unspecified disorders of nose and nasal sinuses

J34.0 - J34.9

[significant nasal obstruction][after four or more weeks of

conservative management when criteria are met]

Acquired deformity of nose [that prevents access to other

M95.0

intranasal areas when such access is required to perform

medically necessary surgical procedures] [not covered for nasal

valve collapse]

Q30.1 - Q30.8 Other congenital anomalies of nose [deformity of septum]

Q35.1 - Q35.9 Cleft palate

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

6/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Q37.0 - Q37.9 Cleft palate with cleft lip

Q67.0 - Q67.4 Congenital musculoskeletal deformities of skull, face, and jaw

[congenital deviated septum]

Epistaxis [related to septal deformity]

R04.0

ICD-10 codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Allergic rhinitis

J30.1 - J30.9

Chronic rhinitis

J31.0

Rhinoplasty:

CPT codes covered if selection criteria are met [limited circumstances only]:

Excision dermoid cyst, nose; simple, skin, subcutaneous

30124

Excision dermoid cyst, nose; complex, under bone or cartilage

30125

Rhinoplasty, primary; including major septal repair

30420

Rhinoplasty, secondary; intermediate revision (bony work with

30435

osteotomies)

major revision (bony work with osteotomies)

30450

Rhinoplasty for nasal deformity secondary to congenital cleft lip

30460

and/or palate, including columellar lengthening; tip only

tip, septum, osteotomies

30462

CPT codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Injection(s), platelet rich plasma, any site, including image

0232T

guidance, harvesting and preparation when performed

Rhinoplasty, primary; lateral and alar cartilages and/or elevation

30400

of nasal tip

complete, external parts including bony pyramid, lateral and

30410

alar cartilages, and/or elevation of nasal tip

Rhinoplasty, secondary; minor revision (small amount of nasal

30430

tip work)

Repair of nasal valve collapse with subcutaneous/submucosal

30468

lateral wall implant(s)

Other CPT codes related to the CPB:

Excision inferior turbinate, partial or complete, any method

30130

Submucous resection inferior turbinate, partial or complete, any

30140

method

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

7/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Repair of nasal vestibular stenosis (eg, spreader grafting, lateral

30465

nasal wall reconstruction)

31231 - 31235 Nasal/sinus endoscopy, diagnostic

31237 - 31294 Nasal/sinus endoscopy, surgical

Computed tomography, head or brain; without contrast material

70450

with contrast material(s)

70460

without contrast material, followed by contrast material(s)

70470

and further sections

Computer tomography, maxillofacial area: without contrast

70486

material

with contrast material(s)

70487

without contrast material, followed by contrast material(s)

70488

and further sections

HCPCS codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Spirox Latera Absorbable Nasal Implant - no speciﬁc code:

Autologous platelet rich plasma for chronic wounds/ulcer s,

G0460

including phlebotomy, centrifugation, and all other preparatory

procedures, administration and dressings, per treatment

Procuren or other growth factor preparation to promote wound

S9055

healing

ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Benign neoplasm of middle ear, nasal cavity and accessory

D14.0

sinuses [nasal dermoid]

Acquired deformity of nose [individual case review see criteria,

M95.0

nasal wall weakness]

Choanal atresia [individual case review see criteria]

Q30.0

Q30.1 - Q30.9 Other congenital anomalies of nose [individual case review see

criteria]

Q35.1 - Q35.9 Cleft palate

Q37.0 - Q37.9 Cleft palate with cleft lip

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

8/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Intra-nasal excision or destruction:

CPT codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Excision or destruction (eg, laser), intranasal lesion; internal

30117

approach

ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Other viral warts

B07.8

Viral wart, unspecified

B07.9

C11.0 – C11.9 Malignant neoplasm of nasopharynx

Malignant neoplasm of nasal cavity

C30.0

Malignant neoplasm of overlapping sites of accessory sinuses

C31.8

Malignant neoplasm of bones of skull and face [fibro-osseous

C41.0

lesions nose]

Malignant melanoma of nose

C43.31

Malignant melanoma of scalp and neck

C43.4

Unspecified malignant neoplasm of skin of nose

C44.301

Basal cell carcinoma of skin of nose

C44.311

Squamous cell carcinoma of skin of nose

C44.321

Other specified malignant neoplasm of skin of nose

C44.391

Merkel cell carcinoma of nose

C4A.31

Malignant neoplasm of peripheral nerves of head, face and

C47.0

neck [nose schwannoma]

Malignant neoplasm of head, face and neck

C76.0

Melanoma in situ of other parts of face

D03.39

Carcinoma in situ of skin of other parts of face

D04.39

Carcinoma in situ of other specified site

D09.8

Benign neoplasm of nasopharynx [juvenile angiofibroma]

D10.6

Benign neoplasm of parotid gland [pleomorphic adenomas]

D11.0

Benign neoplasm of middle ear, nasal cavity and accessory

D14.0

sinuses [nasal inverted papilloma]

Hemangioma unspecified site

D18.00

Hemangioma of skin and subcutaneous tissue

D18.01

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

9/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Hemangioma of other sites

D18.09

Other benign neoplasm of skin of unspecified part of face

D23.30

Other benign neoplasm of skin of other parts of face

D23.39

Benign neoplasm of other specified sites

D36.7

Benign neoplasm, unspecified site

D36.9

Neoplasm of uncertain behavior of skin

D48.5

Neoplasm of uncertain behavior of other specified sites

D48.7

Neoplasm of unspecified behavior of respiratory system

D49.1

Neoplasm of unspecified behavior of bone, soft tissue, and skin

D49.2

Neoplasm of unspecified behavior of other specified sites

D49.89

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia

I78.0

Nasal polyp [nasal polyps]

J33.0 – J33.9

Abscess, furuncle and carbuncle of nose

J34.0

Nasal mucositis (ulcerative)

J34.81

Hypertrophy of adenoids

J35.2

Mucocele of salivary gland

K11.6

Actinic keratosis

L57.0

Other seborrheic keratosis

L82.1

Scar conditions and fibrosis of skin

L90.5

Pyogenic granuloma [pyogenic granuloma nose]

L98.0

Disorder of the skin and subcutaneous tissue, unspecified

L98.9

Wegener's granulomatosis without renal involvement

M31.30

Other specified necrotizing vasculopathies

M31.8

Necrotizing vasculopathy, unspecified

M31.9

Necrotizing fasciitis

M72.6

Other congenital malformations of nose [dermoids] [nasal glial

Q30.8

heterotopias]

Other specified congenital malformations of skin

Q82.8

Epistaxis [recurrent, refractory]

R04.0

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

10/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Foreign body in nasal sinus, nostril, pharynx [nasopharynx]

T17.0XXA -

T17.298S

ICD-10 codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Chronic rhinitis

J31.0

Chronic sinusitis

J32.0 – J32.9

Cyst and mucocele of nose and nasal sinus

J34.1

Deviated nasal septum

J34.2

Hypertrophy of nasal turbinates

J34.3

Internal nasal valve collapse

J34.8200 –

J34.8202

External nasal valve collapse

J34.8210 –

J34.8212

Other specified disorders of nose and nasal sinuses [septal

J34.89

swell bodies]

Unspecified disorder of nose and nasal sinuses

J34.9

Pyriform aperture reduction (pyriform turbinoplasty):

CPT codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Pyriform aperture reduction (pyriform turbinoplasty) - no speciﬁc code:

Other CPT codes related to the CPB:

Osteoplasty, facial bones; reduction [Pyriform aperture

21209

reduction (pyriform turbinoplasty)]

Balloon septoplasty:

CPT codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Balloon septoplasty - no speciﬁc code

ICD-10 codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Deviated nasal septum

J34.2

Fracture of nasal bones

S02.2XXA –

S02.2XXS

Nasal septal button for non-surgical closure:

CPT codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Insertion, nasal septal prosthesis (button)

30220

ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Other specified disorders of nose and nasal sinuses [Nasal

J34.89

septal perforation]

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

11/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Congenital perforated nasal septum

Q30.3

Repair of nasal septal perforation:

CPT codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Repair nasal septal perforations

30630

ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Other specified disorders of nose and nasal sinuses [Nasal

J34.89

septal perforation]

Congenital perforated nasal septum

Q30.3

Background

Reconstructive rhinoplasty is surgery of the nose to correct an external

nasal deformity, damaged nasal structures or to replace lost tissue, while

maintaining or improving the physiological function of the nose.

Reconstructive septoplasty is the surgical correction of defects and

deformities of the nasal septum (partition between the nostrils) by

altering, splinting or removing obstructive tissue while maintaining or

improving the physiological function of the nose.

Cosmetic rhinoplasty and/or septoplasty are performed solely to enhance

appearance.

Nasal septoplasty is a procedure to correct anatomic deformity or

deviation of the nasal septum. Its purpose is to restore the structure

facilitating proper nasal function. Cosmetic enhancement, if any, is

incidental. Because the septum is deviated in most adults, the potential

exists for over-utilization of septoplasty in asymptomatic individuals. The

primary indication for surgical treatment of a deviated septum is nasal

airway obstruction. Corrective surgery also is done to treat recurrent

epistaxis associated with the septal deviation or sinusitis in which the

deviation has a contributory role, and, occasionally, is necessary to gain

access to another region such as the sphenoid, sella turcica or pituitary

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

12/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

gland. In addition, septoplasty may be performed in response to an injury

(nasal trauma) or in conjunction with cleft palate repair. Note: Under

many Aetna plans, surgery to correct deformity due to an injury is covered

when it is performed in the calendar year of the accident that causes the

injury or in the next calendar year. After this time period has elapsed,

covered surgery is contingent on the need for functional improvement,

i.e., the other specific indications for surgery would apply. Please check

benefit plan descriptions for details.

The nose is essentially a respiratory organ that provides a passageway

for incoming and outgoing air. The internal nose is comprised of 2 nasal

cavities (nostrils) through which air enters and passes posteriorly to the

nasopharynx; it is separated in the middle by the septum which is

composed of cartilage, anteriorly and bone, posteriorly. The nasal cavity

is an irregularly shaped space extending from the bony palate that

separates the nose and mouth cavities upward to the frontal ethmoid and

sphenoid bones of the cranial cavity. Each nasal cavity is divided into 3

passageways (the superior, middle and inferior meati) by the projection of

the 4 nasal turbinates (inferior, middle, superior and supreme) from the

lateral walls of the internal nose. The inferior turbinate is a separate

bone, while the other 3 are part of the ethmoid bone. The turbinates

greatly increase the surface area of the mucous membrane over which air

travels as it passes through the nasal passages and into the

nasopharynx, serving to improve humidification of inspired air.

The vestibule of the nostril is lined with skin containing nasal hairs and

some sebaceous and sweat glands. The nose is lined with respiratory

mucosa except for the skin in the vestibule and the olfactory epithelium.

Mucus secreted by the mucosa is carried back to the nasopharynx by the

cilia of the mucosa. The nasal mucosa is extremely vascular, which

makes it appear redder than the oral mucosa.

The blood supply to the nose is from the external and internal carotid

arteries. One of the terminal divisions of the external carotid artery, the

internal maxillary artery and its terminal branch, the sphenopalatine

artery, supply blood to most of the posterior nasal septum and lateral wall

of the nose. Blood is supplied to the anterior superior part of the septum

and lateral wall by the internal carotid system which includes the anterior

ethmoid artery.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

13/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

A number of techniques can be used to straighten and thin a displaced or

deviated septum. In the most common procedure, an incision is made

through the mucosa and perichondrium (on 1 side) just behind the

mucocutaneous junction. The mucoperichondrium and the

mucoperiosteum are elevated on that side. The cartilage is then cut

through at the site of the original incision. Similar mucoperichondrial and

periosteal flaps are elevated on the opposite side until the septal cartilage

and bones are freed of all soft tissue attachments. The obstructing

pieces of cartilage or bone or both are removed or placed in a better

position by reshaping through marsupialization.

In one approach, submucous resection, almost all the framework of the

septum, except a strut at the top and in the front (caudal and dorsal

struts), is removed. In other techniques, an effort is made to excise as

little cartilage and bone as possible. The obstruction is corrected by

shaving off the thickened cartilage and braking its spring, leaving the

septum thinned and straightened. When the inferior edge of the cartilage

is dislocated and appears in one vestibule rather than in the midline, an

incision through the entire membranous collumella just in front of the

cartilage affords an end-on view of the free edge of the cartilage.

The potential complications of septoplasty include septal perforation;

failure to completely improve breathing due to swollen membranes as is

seen in allergic patients; post-operative bleeding; nasal crusting; and re-

obstruction due to improper healing and scarring, creating intranasal

synechiae.

There are 4 pairs of paranasal sinuses, frontal, maxillary, ethmoidal and

sphenoidal. Sinuses are mucous membrane-lined cavities in the facial

bones that drain into the nasal cavities through openings in grooves (the

meati) between the turbinates. Although it has been purported that

sinuses serve to lighten the weight of the skull and give the voice its

resonance and timbre, much of their function is unknown.

The American Academy of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery

(AAOHNS, 1998) has noted that the following findings are useful in

assessing the need for septoplasty:

I. History - one or more required:

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

14/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

A. Asymptomatic deformity that prevents surgical access to other

intranasal areas, i.e., ethmoidectomy;

B. Atypical facial pain of nasal origin; positive response to topical

anesthetic, where deformed septum contacts a turbinate,

supports but may not prove septal cause;

C. Frequent nosebleeds;

D. Nasal airway obstruction or diﬃcult nasal breathing causing

any of the following: mouth breathing, snoring, sleep apnea or

recurrent sinus infections;

II. Physical Examination - all appropriate ﬁndings required:

A. Description of complete anterior and posterior nasal

examination;

B. Description of nasopharynx, oropharynx, hypopharynx and

larynx if purpose of surgery is to prevent sleep apnea or

snoring;

C. Document absence of nasal polyps, tumors, turbinate

hypertrophy or other causes of obstruction unless their

removal is part of the proposed surgery;

D. Identiﬁcation of known or suspected bleeding site if the

purpose of surgery is to control epistaxis;

E. Identiﬁcation of sinus that is recurrently infected if the purpose

of surgery is to control disease.

The AAOHNS states that objective testing (e.g., CT scan) is optional in

assessing the need for septoplasty.

Septal Deviation

A deviated nasal septum is an abnormal shift in location of the nasal

septum; it is a common condition causing obstruction of the nasal

passages and difficulty in breathing and recurrent nose bleeds.

Septal deviation may occur during the birth process, but even when the

septum is straight at birth, it is likely to become deformed or deviated

from the midline as a person ages; often there is no history of injury to

account for the change. Frequently there are no symptoms associated

with a deviated septum. A significantly deviated septum can be seen,

upon examination, to be inclined or bent to one side (sometimes an S-

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

15/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

shaped curve blocks both sides) and the airway is greatly reduced. The

obstruction may be anterior (cartilaginous) or posterior (bony) or

cartilaginous and bony. Sometimes the anterior end of the septal

cartilage is dislocated into one nasal vestibule, causing moderate to

severe degrees of nasal obstruction. In the presence of symptoms, the

position and degree of any deviations, dislocations, and spurs should be

noted on a diagram of the septum. Under such conditions, septal

reconstruction or submucous resection is appropriate to relieve the nasal

obstruction. Such surgery is not ordinarily intended to correct headache

or reduce nasal mucous discharge.

Except for nasal obstruction, other symptoms resulting from septal

malformations are not well defined. While headaches are found in some

patients who have a septal spur impinging on the inferior turbinate, the

possibility of coincidence in patients who have both head pain and septal

deformity is great and careful evaluation is required before a causal

relationship is suggested.

Symptoms of sinusitis may be influenced by a deviated septum that

obstructs a sinus opening, and sometimes nosebleeds are produced as a

result of air currents drying the mucosa that covers the deflected septum.

Nasal Obstruction

The nasal valves or vestibules are the areas just inside the nostrils

comprised of cartilage and are structured to work together to keep the

nasal airway open by facilitating airflow resistance during breathing. The

internal valves are located in each side of the nose at the upper edge of

the hair bearing area, while the outer (external) valves are at the edge of

the nostril rim. Aging, congenital abnormality or prior nasal surgery may

cause nasal valve impairment such as nasal valve collapse, also referred

to as vestibular stenosis. Nasal valves may narrow, weaken or collapse

resulting in symptoms of nasal obstruction.

Nasal obstruction can be caused by changes in the tissue of the nasal

cavity, septum, or turbinates; disease of the nasal vestibule; or tumors of

the nasal cavity; it can be temporary or fixed. Obstructive sensations can

be associated with the physiologic process known as the nasal cycle, i.e.,

the physiologic alteration of congestion and decongestion of the nasal

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

16/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

turbinates. This phenomenon, present in about 80 % of the population,

means that breathing at any time may be more difficult on one side, but

the sides will switch after 2 to 4 hours. Because of the nasal cycle, total

nasal resistance or breathing through both nares remains somewhat

constant without producing symptoms of total nasal airway obstruction.

Another normal physiologic occurrence is positional nasal airway

obstruction, i.e., when a person lies on one side, that dependent side

tends to feel obstructed.

A very common cause of nasal obstruction is allergic rhinitis; this usually

can be determined by a patient’s history and clearly requires medical, not

surgical, management. Mechanical obstruction due to septal deformity or

hypertrophic turbinates is one of several nonallergic causes.

In order to treat nasal obstruction appropriately, accurate diagnosis of its

cause is essential. Evaluation should include quantification and

qualification of the symptoms, determination of the site and cause of

obstruction, and determination of any predisposing factors. The history

should answer the questions of the duration of obstruction, any

precipitating events such as trauma, are symptoms continuous or

intermittent, unilateral or bilateral, or do they alternate from side to side.

It is important to ascertain if symptoms are worse at certain times of the

day or night, at certain times of the year, or in any position such as lying

on one side, and also if they are provoked by environmental factors,

allergens, irritants or dietary factors.

Along with a full ear, nose and throat examination, a systematic

evaluation of the nasal cavity, the paranasal sinuses, and nasopharynx

should be performed. In addition to rhinoscopy using a head mirror or

fiberoptic headlight, flexible fiberoptic and rigid Hopkins rod endoscopy

are important tools in diagnosing a variety of pathologies and anatomic

abnormalities.

While obstructive symptoms associated with septal deviation usually

occur on the affected side, paradoxically, a patient with a significant

septal deviation may complain of obstruction on the apparently non-

obstructed side. This can occur when a septal deviation has been

present for years but the patient is unaware of the deformity since he can

breathe comfortably from the other side. Under these circumstances

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

17/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

when a major septal deviation causes enlargement of one nasal passage

at the expense of the other, the inferior and sometimes the middle

turbinate in the enlarged passage undergo compensatory mucosal

hypertrophy so that the total airflow resistance of the nose remains pretty

normal. However, if the nasal cycle becomes more pronounced for any

reason or even a mild degree of allergic or vasomotor rhinitis is acquired,

then the symptoms will be noted primarily in the enlarged side rather than

in the anatomically narrowed one since the hypertrophied turbinates on

the enlarged side swell considerably more from any stimulus than do the

relatively atrophic ones on the narrow side.

Permanent enlargement of the turbinates, particularly the inferior

turbinate, may result from a long-standing allergic rhinitis and low-grade

inflammation. The turbinate loses most of its normal ability to expand and

to shrink, resulting in continuous nasal obstruction. Nose drops,

antihistamines and allergic desensitization will not relieve such

obstruction. Treatment options include steroid nasal sprays, injection of a

sclerosing solution beneath the mucosa of the turbinate and submucosal

electrocoagulation; however, in some cases, successful treatment is

possible only by submucous resection of the turbinate itself.

At the extreme, nasal airway obstruction can lead to pulmonary pathology

because the protective functions of the nose (humidification, heating and

filtering) cannot occur. Asthma and bronchitis may worsen as a result of

nasal obstruction. As noted previously, septal reconstruction or

submucous resection is appropriate to relieve nasal obstruction that is

definitively caused by a deviated septum.

Standard surgical methods for nasal valve repair depend upon the

location and extent of the structural and functional impairment, but

generally may include rhinoplasty, septoplasty, turbinoplasty, spreader

grafts and batten grafts. Spreader grafts are formed from autologous

cartilage and act as wedges between the septum and the upper lateral

cartilage, thereby enlarging the internal valve. Batten grafts constructed

from autologous cartilage (septum, ear or rib) are used to provide

structure to the nasal side wall, supporting a weakened or pinched

external valve.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

18/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Sinusitis

Sinusitis means an inflammatory change in the mucosa of a sinus.

Definite signs and symptoms are produced by this pathology.

Uncomplicated acute sinusitis is usually apparent clinically and imaging

studies are unnecessary. However, plain films may be helpful in

equivocal cases, and computed tomography (CT) now plays a role in the

evaluation of patients with chronic sinusitis who are under consideration

for endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS). CT, especially the coronal plane

view, facilitates accurate definition of regional anatomy and extent of

disease. It is currently the modality of choice in the evaluation of the

paranasal sinuses because of this ability to optimally display bone, soft

tissues and air. In selected patients with complications of sinusitis,

magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be useful since its multiplanar

imaging capability reveals any extension of sinus infection into the orbit

and adjacent brain, especially in cases of aggressive fungal infection.

However, authorities recommend that MRI should not precede CT

because CT better displays the complex bony anatomy of the paranasal

sinuses, orbits and skull base.

Although the paranasal sinuses often have been implicated as the

underlying cause of nasal obstruction or other problems such as

headaches, fever of unknown origin, cough, chronic dyspepsia and other

upper respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms, in actuality, probably only

10 % of patients who consult an otolaryngologist because of "sinus

trouble" have sinusitis. Allergy evaluation is a useful part of the workup

for chronic sinusitis.

Treatment of acute sinusitis is medical, directed at relief of pain,

shrinkage of the nasal mucosa and control of infection; such conservative

treatment is effective in 90 % of patients. When a subacute infection

persists, antral irrigation and/or antral puncture may be indicated and

short term corticosteroids may be helpful. Inadequate treatment of the

acute or subacute phase or recurrent attacks can lead to irreversible

tissue changes in the membranes lining one or more of the paranasal

sinuses, i.e., chronic suppurative sinusitis. Frequently surgery is required

for this condition with removal of all diseased soft tissue and bone,

adequate postoperative drainage, and obliteration of the preexisting sinus

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

19/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

cavity where possible. Although a specific technique is used for each

sinus, the aim of any procedure used is to eradicate the infection but to

leave contiguous structures normal.

When sinusitis is influenced by a deviated septum that occludes a sinus

ostium, septoplasty may be warranted.

Epistaxis (Nose-bleed)

The most common cause of nose-bleed is trauma such as picking a crust

off the nasal septum or excessive drying of the nasal mucosa. Bleeding

from the posterior half of the nose, however, is more likely to be caused

by a splitting of a sclerotic blood vessel and is more common in

hypertensive patients. Anterior nosebleeds are easy to treat by aspirating

the blood clots, applying topical epinephrine and cauterizing the bleeding

point. Prolonged packing of both sides of the nose may be necessary to

allow healing in some patients. Because it is often impossible to see the

exact bleeding site in posterior nosebleeds, treatment is more difficult.

Bleeding must be controlled by compression of the bleeding vessel with a

postnasal pack for 48 to 96 hours, arterial ligation or trans-palatal

injection of saline solution into the greater palatine foramen. Usually

operative procedures on the nasal septum are not required for the control

of nosebleeds; however, sometimes when projecting parts of the septum

are traumatized by the drying effect of inspired air and impede

visualization of the area of the nose posterior to the deviation, then

septoplasty may be indicated to visualize the area for purposes of cautery

and control.

Nasal Packing

The practice of nasal packing following septoplasty was based on a

desire to prevent post-operative complications such as bleeding, septal

hematoma, and adhesion formation. However, it was since found that not

only is nasal packing ineffective in this regard, it can actually cause these

complications. In a prospective, randomized, comparison study,

Awan and Iqbal (2008) compared nasal packing versus no packing after

septoplasty (n = 88). These investigators examined the incidence of a

variety of post-operative signs and symptoms in patients (15 years of age

and older), who did (n = 44) and did not (n = 44) undergo nasal packing

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

20/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

following septoplasty. They found that patients who underwent packing

experienced significantly more post-operative pain, headache, epiphora,

dysphagia, and sleep disturbance on the night of surgery. Oral and nasal

examinations 7 days post-operatively revealed no significant difference

between the 2 groups in the incidence of bleeding, septal hematoma,

adhesion formation, and local infection. Finally, subjects in the packing

group reported a moderate-to-high level of pain during removal of the

packing. These findings confirmed that nasal packing after septoplasty is

not only unnecessary, it is actually a source of patient discomfort and

other signs and symptoms.

Furthermore, Dubin and Pletcher (2009) stated that although it appears

intuitive that packing may prevent or decrease the incidence of

complications following septoplasty, evidence supporting this assertion is

limited at best. In addition, certain types of nasal packing have been

demonstrated to increase post-operative pain and have been implicated

as a causative factor of catastrophic complications, such as toxic shock.

With limited evidence to suggest a beneficial effect and a potential for

deleterious side-effects, the routine use of post-operative packing

following septoplasty should be questioned.

Banglawala et al (2013) stated that nasal packing is routinely used after

septoplasty because it is believed to decrease risk of post-operative

bleeding, hematomas, and adhesions. Multiple studies have shown,

however, that there are numerous complications associated with nasal

packing. These investigators performed a meta-analysis on the existing

literature to evaluate the role of nasal packing after septoplasty. Two

independent reviewers conducted a literature search using EMBASE,

OVID, Medline, PubMed, Google scholar, Cochrane Library, and

reference list review from 1966 to August 2010 to identify studies

assessing nasal packing after septoplasty. All papers were reviewed for

study design, results, and were assigned an Oxford level of evidence

grade, Detsky score, and Methodological Index for Nonrandomized

Studies (MINORS) score. A total of 16 papers were identified that met

the inclusion criteria; 11 papers were randomized control trials, 3 were

prospective, and 2 were retrospective studies. Nasal packing did not

show benefit in reducing post-operative bleeding, hematomas, septal

perforations, adhesions, or residual deviated nasal septum. There was,

however, an increase in post-operative infections. Two studies using

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

21/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

fibrin products as nasal packing showed a decreased bleeding rate. The

authors concluded that nasal packing after septoplasty does not show

any post-operative benefits. Fibrin products showed a possibility of

decreasing post-operative bleeding. They stated that routine use of nasal

packing after septoplasty is not warranted.

Extracorporeal Septoplasty

Extracorporeal septoplasty (ECS) is a radical solution for extreme

deviations of the septum. This approach entails resection, extracorporeal

straightening, and re-implantation of the nasal septum (Baumann, 2010).

Often, the deviation of the nasal septum is one component of a larger

nasal deformity. The deformity may involve the nasal tip, dorsum, and

nasal bones. An intranasal approach to such deformities may not be

adequate. In these situations, an open septorhinoplasty approach is

best. Extracorporeal septoplasty is a technique that has been described

to address these severe cases (Fettman et al, 2009). This technique

involves removing the entire nasal septum and straightening the septum

using various techniques, followed by reimplantation. Often, the external

nose appears twisted in addition to symptomatic nasal obstruction, and

extracorporeal septoplasty may help to correct this deformity as well.

Matulic and Skitarelic (2004) stated that rhinoplasty is often thought of as

the most challenging of all esthetic procedures. Irregularities of nasal tip

implicate decreasing of nasal function and are generally regarded as an

unattractive facial feature. The combined operative techniques, which

required ECS, incorporation of cartilage disc graft and onlay graft were

performed in 19 patients. Among the 19 patients, 15 had procedure of

primary rhinoplasty and in 4 of them secondary or revised rhinoplasty was

made. Indications for this operative technique were in patients with boxy

nasal tip, bifid nasal tip, lateral alar tethering with extremely fat or thin

nose skin. The authors emphasized that this technique is very successful

with an acceptable percentage of post-operative complications. The

technique is method of choice for reconstruction of extreme nasal tip

irregularities where the usual reconstruction technique does not give

satisfactory results.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

22/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Gubisch (2005) described a technique of extracorporeal septal

reconstruction to correct the markedly deviated nasal septum.

Retrospective medical charts of 2,119 patients undergoing ECS from

January 1, 1981, through July 31, 2004, by the author in a tertiary care

facial plastic surgery center were reviewed. The primary outcome

measures included surgical complications, revision rate, and the

surgeon's subjective determination of functional and esthetic outcomes.

Of the 2,119 patients, 2 cohorts were available for review. From January

1, 1981, to July 31, 1987, the author performed the operation on 459

patients. Fifty-seven complications (12 %) occurred, with irregular

contour of the dorsum or saddling noted in 38 (8 %). Twenty patients (4

%) elected to have revision septoplasty. From January 1, 1996, to

December 31, 1996, the author supervised residents performing ECS in

108 patients. Fourteen post-operative complications (13 %) occurred,

with dorsal irregularity noted in 12 (11 %). Eight patients (7 %) elected to

have revision septoplasty. The authors concluded that ECS is an

important surgical option for the correction of the markedly deviated nasal

septum. Fixation of the straightened and re-planted septum at the nasal

spine and dorsal septum border with the upper lateral cartilages is

essential. Spreader grafts for stabilization of the internal nasal valve and

dorsal onlay grafts to prevent dorsal irregularity are strongly encouraged.

Most (2006) described a modified ECS technique and measured its

effectiveness with a validated quality-of-life instrument. Pre-operative

and post-operative evaluation was performed using photographs and the

Nasal Obstruction Symptoms Evaluation scale. A total of 12 consecutive

patients were enrolled. No complications occurred. All patients noted

improved airway function post-operatively. There was a significant

improvement in mean Nasal Obstruction Symptoms Evaluation score

post-operatively (76.6 versus 12.9; p < 0.01). Examination of post-

operative photographs revealed improved mid-vault and tip anatomy.

The authors concluded that the anterior septal reconstruction technique is

effective in improving both nasal airway function and esthetics in patients

with severe septo-nasal deviation. The technique avoids the most

common complication of standard ECS by preserving the dorsal strut of

septal cartilage and its attachment to the nasal bones at the keystone

area.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

23/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Kantas et al (2008) evaluated the effectiveness, indications, and

contraindications of the ECS in treating a severely deviated nose. A total

of 64 patients operated on for esthetic correction of a severely deviated

nose were studied. Forty-six of them were first operations and 18 were

revision cases. The surgical procedure of choice was the closed

technique. Septal cartilage was prepared and then dislocated, followed

by external alignment and re-implantation. Hump reduction with lateral

osteotomies and, occasionally, medial dislocation of nasal bones was

carried out. Cosmetic results were satisfactory in all first operation

cases. In 11 of the 18 revision cases, septal preparation was impossible;

in 2, septal sagging was observed; and in 1, perforation was noted. The

authors concluded that ECS is an effective, safe, and reliable technique,

especially for twisted noses undergoing surgery for the first time. The

authors stated, however, that ECS is strongly contraindicated in a revised

deviated nose.

Jang and Kwon (2010) noted that secure fixation of the re-implanted

septum is critical for successful long-term esthetic and functional

outcomes following ECS. These investigators described the results

of their modified ECS technique. This retrospective study involved 27

patients with a deviated nose who underwent the authors' modified ECS

method in rhinoplasty between June 2006 and January 2009.

Anthropometric changes were assessed from pre-operative and post-

operative facial photographs. Patient satisfaction was evaluated, and

nasal obstruction improvement was assessed on a visual analog scale.

Post-operative correction of the external nose deviation angle was

statistically significant. Twenty-four patients (89 %) were satisfied with

the cosmetic outcome, and all 23 patients with moderate-to-severe pre-

operative nasal obstruction were satisfied with the post-operative

improved nasal breathing. The authors concluded that their modified

ECS fixation technique was easy to perform and effective in

septorhinoplasty for severe septal deviation.

Nasal Valve Suspension

Nasal valve suspension surgery involves inserting a suture through the

nasal mucosa, into the nasal valve and using a bone anchor to secure the

suture to the orbital rim, purportedly maintaining valve patency. The

procedure has been proposed as a treatment for nasal valve collapse.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

24/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Nasal valve collapse is a common cause of nasal airway obstruction.

Nasal valve suspension (NVS) is a surgical approach for nasal valve

repair, which entails suspension of the valve to the orbital rim. During

NVS, an anchored suture is first attached to the orbital rim and then a

suture is passed through the collapsed valve. The suspension suture is

then returned to the anchor site at the orbital rim and tied, resulting in a

repaired nasal valve that supposedly allows for less obstructed airflow.

Modifications to this procedure or other types of suspensions, such as

those using sutures tunneled within the facial soft tissue to an infra-orbital

incision on each side of the nose, have also been reported.

In a non-randomized, pilot study, Paniello (1996) evaluated the safety and

effectiveness of NVS for treating nasal valve collapse. Subjects (12 men

aged 38 to 73 years; mean age of 59.3 years) were patients with

complaints of nasal airway obstruction, a positive Cottle maneuver, and

clinical findings of nasal valve collapse. Follow-up ranged from 1 to 20

months. Main outcome measures were subjective self-assessment

scores for nasal airflow were collected on a 10-point scale. Anterior

rhinomanometry, acoustic rhinometry, and photographic analysis provided

objective data. The procedure involves accessing the orbital rim by a

trans-conjunctival incision, then passing sutures from the nose to this

incision where they may be affixed to the orbital rim. The collapsing

tissue of the nasal valve is thus supported and collapse is prevented. All

patients reported immediate subjective improvement in their symptoms of

nasal obstruction; this was reflected in their self-assessment scores. The

rhinomanometry showed reduced nasal resistance in 10 (83 %) of 12

patients. The acoustic rhinometry showed an increase in minimum cross-

sectional area (CSA) in 2 (33 %) of 6 patients, with the others remaining

stable. The photographic analysis revealed mild widening of the mid-third

of the nose in 6 of 12 patients, although this was not of concern to the

patients. There were no major complications. The authors concluded

that NVS is a safe and effective procedure for treatment of nasal valve

collapse. These preliminary findings need to be validated by well-

designed studies with larger sample size and longer follow-up.

Nuara and Mobley (2007) reviewed their experience with NVS in a cohort

of patients with nasal valve collapse, including a subset of patients with

facial paralysis. The objectives were to determine patient satisfaction and

complication rates after NVS. A retrospective review of patients 18 years

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

25/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

and older who had NVS from 2003 to 2006 with a follow-up of at least 1

month was performed. Data were collected on diagnosis, surgical

outcomes, complications, and treatments required. Complications

included adverse outcomes, infections, and the need for repeat surgery

or treatments. In 17 charts reviewed, 9 patients (53 %) had nasal valve

collapse as a result of facial paralysis, and 8 (47 %) had previous nasal

surgery. Follow-up ranged from 1 to 30 months, with a mean of 16.5.

Moderate-to-complete resolution of obstruction was reported by 82 % of

patients, or for 88 % of procedures. Sustained relief was observed in 2 of

8 patients who had previous nasal surgery and 6 of 9 who had no

previous nasal surgery (p = 0.1). Infection occurred in 4 (24 %) patients

and 5 (21 %) total suspensions and ranged from 1.5 to 7 months. Six (35

%) patients experienced a loss of suspension at 6 to 22 months. The

authors concluded that NVS is a technically straightforward, relatively

reversible procedure particularly useful in the patient with facial paralysis.

The efficacy is excellent in the short-term yet appears to diminish with

time.

Andre and Vuyk (2008) described their experience with NVS for treating

nasal valve insufficiency. A total of 20 patients with nasal valve

insufficiency underwent NVS (a total of 33 sides). Patients were

prospectively studied and their nasal patency was rated per side pre- and

post-operatively, by subjective self-evaluation on a scale from 1 to 10.

Post-operatively 7 sides (21 %) were rated as unchanged, on 17 sides

(52 %) the improvement was from 1 to 3 out of 10, and on 9 sides (27 %)

4 or more out of 10. The average post-operative improvement for all

sides was 2.3 out of 10. In 5 patients (25 %) complications occurred,

such as pain, inflammation and suborbital swelling, and 3 eventually

underwent a re-exploration of the surgical area, resulting in a permanent

scar in 1 patient. The authors concluded that although NVS may be

beneficial for some patients, based on their experience, they would not

recommend this technique as first line treatment for nasal valve

insufficiency. In this series, these researchers found relatively limited

improvement in most patients and a far higher complication rate

compared with other nasal valve procedures they had experienced with in

the past.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

26/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Spielmann et al (2009) evaluated the surgical treatment strategies for

nasal valve collapse. A systematic review of studies to treat nasal valve

collapse, using surgical methods, from 1970 to 2008. A search of EBM

reviews, MEDLINE, and EMBASE was performed using the following

search terms: "nasal valve collapse" and "alar collapse," "nasal valve

insufficiency," "alar insufficiency," and "functional rhinoplasty". The

following outcome measures were sought: subjective symptom relief,

cosmetic outcome, and objective measurements of nasal airway patency.

The following were inclusion criteria: at least 10 patients in each study,

stated aim to improve airway obstruction, and a minimum of 1 month

follow-up for every patient. These investigators identified 98 papers,

which were then retrieved and analyzed. Of these, 43 met the inclusion

criteria. No randomized controlled trials exist; 1 trial presented level IIIb

evidence, but all other studies were classed as level IV. Seven authors

present objective measurements of nasal airflow or CSA, and 4 authors

presented validated outcome measures. The authors concluded that a

variety of focused surgical techniques were described to deal with nasal

valve collapse. They could find no randomized controlled trials on nasal

valve surgery. Research in nasal valve surgery is frequently driven by

technical description of surgical technique rather than the establishment

of evidence of long-term patient benefit. They stated that although their

understanding of the role of the nasal valve in the pathophysiology of

nasal obstruction has improved vastly, the myriad of surgical techniques

described perhaps reflects the uncertainty in choice of technique and in

degree of patient benefit.

In a prospective pilot study, Kim et al (2011) evaluated the effect of

septoplasty on the clinical course of allergic rhinitis by comparing (i)

symptom change using the visual analog scale (VAS), (ii) change of the

medication score, and (iii) improvement of the quality of life using a

questionnaire. A total of 62 patients who had undergone septoplasty

and turbinoplasty for septal deviation and allergic rhinitis were enrolled in

group A; 26 patients who had undergone only turbinoplasty for allergic

rhinitis were enrolled in group B. The VAS score, the Average Rescue

Medication Score (ARMS), and the Rhinasthma Questionnaire for the

quality of life were all obtained from each patient. These parameters

were compared before and after the surgery and between the groups.

Both groups showed significant improvement of the VAS score (p <

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

27/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

0.001). When the change of VAS was compared between groups, there

was a significant difference in group A only for nasal obstruction (p =

0.047). Comparison of the ARMS between groups showed significant

improvement in both groups after the surgery (p < 0.01). However, there

were no differences between the groups. The Rhinasthma score of group

A was significantly lowered after the surgery (56.4 +/- 13.2 to 34.1 +/-

12.3, p < 0.001). The Rhinasthma score of group A was significantly

lower than that of group B after the surgery (p = 0.004). The authors

concluded that this is the first research about the potential effect of

septoplasty on the clinical course of allergic rhinitis. They stated that

further studies are needed to elucidate the mechanisms underlying these

effects.

Antibiotic Prophylaxis in Septoplasty

Ricci and D'Ascanio (2012) stated that antibiotic prophylaxis for surgical

procedures is a common practice among otorhinolaryngologists. Most

American Rhinology Society members use antibiotics routinely in

septoplasties, even though the need for this practice in rhinological

surgery is controversial. These investigators evaluated the necessity of

antibiotic prophylaxis in septoplasties in relation to surgical outcome and

post-operative complications. In a prospective, randomized clinical

trial these researchers evaluated 630 subjects who underwent

septoplasty according to the technique already described by the authors.

Patients were divided into 3 groups: group A, no antibiotic prophylaxis;

group B, antibiotics (cefazolin at 1.0 g i.v.) only at anesthetic induction;

and group C, antibiotics both at anesthetic induction (cefazolin at 1.0 g

i.v.) and post-operatively (oral amoxicillin at 1 g every 12 hours) for 7

days. Pre- and post-operative patients' scores on the Nasal Obstruction

Septoplasty Effectiveness (NOSE) questionnaire were compared to

assess the improvement of nasal symptoms after surgery. Post-operative

pain, nasal bleeding, septal hematoma/abscess, fever, and

nausea/vomiting were recorded. Nasal endoscopy was performed 14

days post-operatively to quantify purulent rhinorrhea. An improvement of

post-operative nasal symptoms on the NOSE questionnaire was recorded

with respect to pre-operative score. No significant difference was found

among the groups with regard to post-operative pain, fever,

nausea/vomiting, and nasal bleeding. No case of hematoma or septal

abscess was noticed. No significant difference in purulent nasal

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

28/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

discharge was found among the groups. The authors concluded that

septal surgery with early removal of nasal packing is a clean-

contaminated procedure and does not require routine antibiotic

prophylaxis because of the low infection risk.

Karaman et al (2012) examined the effect of antibiotic prophylaxis and

septoplasty on nasal flora. These researchers included 115 consecutive

patients who underwent septoplasty because of symptomatic nasal septal

deviation. Patients were divided into study and control groups. Study

patients received prophylactic parenteral sodium cefazoline twice-daily

beginning intra-operatively and while the nasal packing remained in the

nose for 48 hours, and expandable polyvinyl acetate (Merocel) packing

covered with antibiotic ointment containing 0.2 % nitrofurazone was

inserted into each nostril at the end of the operation. Control patients

received neither parenteral antibiotic prophylaxis nor antibiotic ointment

around the Merocel packs. Both groups received oral prophylactic

cefuroxime axetil for 5 days after nasal packing was removed. Nasal

flora was determined pre-operatively, post-operatively when nasal

packing was removed, and 3 months after surgery. Study patients were

compared to control patients at pack removal and 1 month after surgery.

The effect of antibiotic use in septoplasty on nasal flora was as follows:

Increased isolation rate of gram-positive rods (p = 0.007), decreased

methicillin-sensitive coagulase-negative staphylococci (p = 0.002). Pre-

operative and post-operative culture results at 3 months were compared.

The effect of septoplasty on nasal flora was as follows: Decreased

coagulase-negative staphylococci (p = 0.05), decreased Klebsiella (p <

0.001), decreased gram-positive rods (p < 0.001), increased methicillin-

sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (p < 0.001). The authors concluded

that septoplasty increases S. aureus colonization and decreases normal

flora. Antibiotics do not protect against S. aureus colonization and

contribute to a decrease in normal flora. They stated that antibiotics do

not seem to confer benefit in terms of flora changes; studies investigating

flora changes with a longer follow-up should be conducted.

Gioacchini et al (2014) noted that both systemic antibiotic therapy and

nasal packing are used frequently in septoplasty. Nevertheless, there is

still great disagreement among authors around the real advantages with

regard to the effectiveness of both of these procedures in septal surgery.

The aim of the present review was to evaluate the more recent data

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

29/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

published on this topic. One appropriate string was run on PubMed to

retrieve articles dealing with the topics mentioned above. A double cross-

check was performed on citations and full-text articles found using the

selected inclusion and exclusion criteria. Overall, the articles analyzed by

these researchers indicated the poor utility of routine antibiotic therapy

and nasal packing during septoplasty, the latter procedure producing

more complications than advantages. The authors concluded that on the

basis of the recent literature, the use of systemic antibiotic prophylaxis

and nasal packing in septal surgery seems to be a non-rational

procedure.

Submucosal Endoscopically Assisted Septoplasty and Closed Nasal

Reduction for the Treatment of Naso-Septal Fractures

Andrades and colleagues (2016) stated that nasal bone fracture is the

most common among facial bone fractures. The prevalence of

concomitant septal and nasal bone fractures fluctuates between 34 %

and 96.2 %. An adequate management of such fractures is essential to

prevent complications such as post-traumatic nasal obstruction and naso-

septal deformities. These researchers introduced the submucosal

endoscopically assisted septoplasty (SEAS) as an alternative approach

for acute septal lesions and reported their experience and outcomes.

They performed a retrospective review including patients with nasal

fracture in association with septal fracture (naso-septal fractures) who

underwent SEAS and closed nasal reduction. A total of 90 patients were

included; 23 % were female and 77 % were male, with a mean age of 40

years. All the cases were work-place accidents or commuting accidents.

The mean time elapsed between the accident and surgery was 15 days.

There were no technique-related intra-operative complications; 3 (3.3 %)

patients suffered a subsequent nasal obstruction and/or deviation of the

nasal axis, requiring subsequent secondary open rhino-septoplasty. The

authors concluded that submucosal endoscopically assisted septoplasty

and closed nasal reduction for the treatment of naso-septal fractures is a

novel approach that reduces the rate of secondary rhino-septoplasty as

compared to other authors' reports. They stated that the technique

described is reproducible, cost-effective and has very encouraging

outcomes (Level of Evidence: IV).

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

30/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Trans-Septal Suturing Following Septoplasty

In a systematic review and meta-analysis, Wang and Dong (2017)

evaluated the curative effect of trans-septal suturing versus nasal packing

after septoplasty. These researchers carried out a computerized search

of the published literature in PubMed, Embase, CENTRAL, Cochrane

Database of Systematic Reviews, WANFANG, CNKI databases.

Randomized trials investigating trans-septal suturing versus nasal

packing following septoplasty in patients with deviated nasal septum were

selected for analysis. Complications and outcome measures included

adhesion, septal hematoma, bleeding, septal perforation, infection, pain,

headache, or residual septal deviation per randomized patients. A total of

19 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of 1,845 subjects were included.

Meta-analysis showed that post-operative pain, headache, and adhesion

were significantly lower in trans-septal suturing group. Nasal packing and

trans-septal suturing technique appeared to be equivalent with regard to

post-operative bleeding, hematoma, septal perforation, infection, and

residual septal deviation. Trans-septal suturing technology is not only

associated with less patient pain, headache, and lower occurrence rate of

adhesion after septoplasty but it also related to higher patient satisfaction

and an improved quality of life (QOL). The suturing technology can be

used as a substitute for traditional nasal packing of the 1st-line

treatment. The authors concluded that more well-designed studies are

needed to confirm the effect of trans-septal suturing following septoplasty.

Dadgarnia and colleagues (2017) stated that it has been shown that

nasal packing after septoplasty is associated with several complications.

In a randomized clinical trial, these investigators compared post-

septoplasty nasal packing and trans-septal suturing, in terms of

complications and outcome of operation. This study was performed on

patients with deviated nasal septum who were candidates for

septoplasty. Patients were visited 3 times after operation (on the 1st 48

hours, 1st week, and 3rd post-operative month). Participants were

checked for having common complications. Rhinomanometric evaluation

was performed to measure nasal air flow and airway resistance, as

indicators of operation efficacy, both prior to and after surgery. A total of

72 patients were allocated into the 2 trial arms. Patients in nasal pack

group reported higher pain scores on the 1st 48 hours (p < 0.001) and 1

week after surgery (p < 0.001). Epiphora (p = 0.028), sleep disturbance

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

31/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

(p = 0.012), and dyspnea (p < 0.001) were also more commonly observed

in patients using nasal pack. Objective evaluation of bleeding

demonstrated that more severe bleeding occurred in patients with trans-

septal sutures (p = 0.001). No differences were found comparing the

indices of rhinomanometry between the 2 groups. The authors concluded

that the use of trans-septal sutures after septoplasty compared to nasal

packing might be associated with lower frequencies of several specific

complications and a lower rate of patients' discomfort. Nevertheless,

increased risk of bleeding and hematoma was noted in the trans-septal

suture group. No differences were observed between the nasal air flow

and resistance of patients in the 2 groups.

Rhinoplasty for Removal of a Nasal Dermoid

Zapata and Kearns (2006) stated that midline congenital nasal lesions

are rare, occurring in 1 out of every 20,000 to 40,000 births. Of these

midline lesions, nasal dermoids are the most common. This review

centered on diagnosis of nasal dermoids, the role of imaging in diagnosis

and surgical planning and the various approaches to surgical

management of these lesions. Multi-planar, high-resolution thin section

MRI allows for excellent soft tissue detail, particularly when intra-cranial

extension is expected. Open rhinoplasty is favored by many head and

neck surgeons for excision of dermoids. Trans-nasal endoscopic excision

of nasal dermoids has been reported but is not recommended for

dermoids extending into or beyond the falx cerebri. The authors

concluded that imaging of the midface and brain is essential for accurate

diagnosis, assessment for any intra-cranial extension and appropriate

surgical planning. Any surgical approach for removal of nasal dermoid

cysts should permit adequate access, allow repair of the skull base and

cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak, facilitate nasal reconstruction and result in

acceptable cosmesis. The surgeon should be able to consider various

surgical approaches to manage these lesions.

Moses and colleagues (2015) stated that the incidence of midline

frontonasal dermoid cysts is 1 in 20,000 to 1 in 40,000. These lesions

may have intra-cranial extension. This is explained by the anatomy and

embryology of naso-frontal development. Skin involvement may also be

extensive . Incomplete excision frequently leads to recurrence. These

investigators reported their experience and pathway for management of

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

32/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

midline dermoids. Databases were searched to identify patients who had

undergone surgery for removal of a dermoid cyst. Pre-operative imaging

and indications for surgery were reviewed. Cases were grouped

according to surgical approach, and outcomes and complications were

identified. A total of 55 patients were treated; MRI or CT was used to

delineate the anatomy, and surgical excision was expedited if there was a

history of infection, especially if imaging suggested intra-cranial

extension; 12 patients were treated endoscopically (1 was converted to

open); 11 patients needed trans-cranial approaches for intra-cranial

extension (20 %). Of these, 1 lesion breached the dura. The remaining

32 patients had dermoids excised with an open approach (direct, bi-

coronal, or rhinoplasty). There were no recurrences in the open group

and there was 1 recurrence in the trans-cranial group that was treated by

re-excision. The authors concluded that midline dermoid cysts are

relatively uncommon. However, knowledge of the pathogenesis of these

lesions together with the authors' experience over 15 years has allowed

them to develop a protocol-driven approach, with a low incidence of

complications.

Hartley and co-workers (2015) noted that nasal dermoids are rare

developmental anomalies seen in children. These researchers reported

the largest case series of 103 patients seen in a quaternary specialist unit

over a 10-year period. They reported the surgical and radiological

findings and proposed a new classification system, which described the

extent of the lesions, thus allowing better surgical planning. These

investigators performed a retrospective review of case notes. Data

collection included demographics, initial presentation, site of lesion, pre-

operative CT and MRI imaging, surgical procedure, intra-operative

findings (including depth of lesion), complications and recurrence.

Surgical findings were correlated with radiological findings. A total of 103

patients were included in the study. The mean age at presentation was

29 months; 89 % of children presented with a naso-glabellar or columellar

lesion and 11 % had a medial canthal lesion. All the patients underwent

pre-operative imaging and were treated with surgical excision; 58 children

had superficial lesions, 45 had subcutaneous tracts extending to varying

depths. Of these, 38 had intra-osseous extension into the frontonasal

bones, 8 extended intra-cranially but remained extra-dural and 2 had

intra-dural extension. There was good correlation between radiological

and surgical findings. The superficial lesions were locally excised. The

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

33/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

lesions with intra-osseous tracts were removed via open rhinoplasty; and

the frontonasal bones drilled for access. Intra-cranial extension was

approached either via a bi-coronal flap and frontal craniotomy or the less

invasive anterior small window craniotomy. The authors concluded that

this report described the largest published cases series of nasal

dermoids. The cases demonstrated the presenting features and the

variable extent of the lesions. The new proposed classification;

superficial, intra-osseous, intra-cranial extra-dural and intra-cranial intra-

dural, allows precise surgical planning. In the presence of intra-cranial

extension, the low morbidity technique of using a brow incision and small

window anterior craniotomy avoided the more invasive and commonly

used bi-coronal flap and frontal craniotomy.

El-Fattah and associates (2016) stated that nasal dermoids are

congenital anomalies constituting 3.7 to 12.6 % of dermoids in the head

and neck. Most of lesions are superficial but there is always a risk that it

may end blindly within the deep structures of the nose or extend intra-

cranially. Complete excision, regardless of extension, is essential and

must be balanced against cosmoses. These investigators reviewed the

clinical characteristics and imaging findings as well as the appropriate

surgical approach adopted for 29 cases managed at Mansoura University

Hospitals. They carried out a retrospective analysis in 29 patients

admitted for management of nasal dermoid between January 2001 and

January 2015 at the Otolaryngology department of our tertiary referral

university hospital. Recorded data included patient's demographics,

complaint, lesion's site, pre-operative radiological findings, surgical

technique, intra-operative findings, and post-operative sequelae. This

series included 12 (41 %) girls and 17 (59 %) boys, with a mean age of

2.5 years; 27 children presented with a naso-frontal swelling of which 20

had an apparent sinus. Other presentations included a swelling in the

inner canthum (n = 1), nasal tip and columella (n = 1); 9 (31 %) patients

had a history of infection and 2 patients gave a positive history of

meningitis. Intra-cranial extra-dural extension was identified in 10

patients (34.5 %) during pre-operative imaging. Surgical modalities

included local excision and direct closure (n = 12), open rhinoplasty (n =

7), bi-coronal excision and craniotomy (n = 10). In 9 cases, the tract was

adherent to the dura, but was carefully dissected and in 1 case resection

required excision of a segment of dura and reconstruction. In a follow-up

period of 1 to 8 years, recurrence was detected in 1e case and the

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

34/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

cosmetic results were satisfactory. The authors concluded that these

lesions were rare and required early precise surgical planning to achieve

complete en bloc excision. This study reported a low morbidity

associated with management of nasal dermoids with intra-cranial

extension.

Absorbable Nasal Implant for Nasal Valve Reconstruction /

Treatment of Nasal Valve Weakness

According to the manufacturer, the Latera nasal implant is used to

support upper and lower lateral cartilage in the nose, reinforcing the nasal

wall like traditional cartilage and polymer grafts. Supporting the cartilage

in this manner is intended reduce nasal airway obstruction symptoms and

help patients breathe better. The Latera implant is absorbed over a period

of about 18 months.

Hernandez Martinez and colleagues (2016) stated that reparation of large

nasal septum perforations continues to be challenging. Bipedicled

mucoperichondrial and inter-positional grafts currently show the most

promising results. New implants have emerged to be used as a support

membrane to carry on the mucosal cells, taking advantage of the innate

proliferative properties of the mucosal tissue. These researchers

compared the effectiveness of 2 kinds of material: non-absorbable

dimethylsiloxane (silicone elastomers) and absorbable porcine small

intestinal submucosa (Surgisis), both used as an inter-positional graft

without neighboring flaps to close nasal septal perforations in an

experimental model. A total of 15 dogs were divided into 3 groups: One

group received Surgisis, the other sheets of dimethylsiloxane and the last

group a sham group. The dogs were followed for 6 weeks. The initial

perforation of the nasal septum showed complete mucosal closure in the

dimethylsiloxane group. The Surgisis group, on the other hand, had a

smaller reduction than that at the beginning (final mean area = 23.0 ± 5.4

mm(2) (p < 0.05); however, complete closure was not achieved. Sham

animals showed an inconstant and slight reduction in dimension from

100 mm(2) to 70 ± 16 mm(2) of mucosa and cartilage, but closure was not

achieved. A significantly higher number of capillaries were observed in

the Surgisis group compared to the dimethylsiloxane group (p < 0.05)

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

35/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

without differences in inflammation, fibrosis, or necrosis. The authors

concluded that the non-absorbable implant; dimethylsiloxane facilitated a

better closure of the nasal septum.

San Nicolo and associates (2017) evaluated the safety and effectiveness

of an absorbable implant for lateral cartilage support in subjects with

nasal valve collapse (NVC) with 12 months follow-up. A total of 30

subjects with Nasal Obstruction Symptom Evaluation (NOSE) score of

greater than or equal to 55 and isolated NVC were treated; 14 cases were

performed in an operating suite under general anesthesia, and 16 cases

were performed in a clinic-based setting under local anesthesia. The

implant, a polylactic acid copolymer, was placed with a delivery tool within

the nasal wall to provide lateral cartilage support. Subjects were

followed-up through 12 months post-procedure; 56 implants were placed

in 30 subjects. The mean pre-operative NOSE score was 76.7 ± 14.8,

with a range of 55 to 100. At 12 months, the mean score was 35.2 ± 29.2,

reflecting an average within-patient reduction of -40.9 ± 31.2 points. The

majority (76 %) of the subjects were responders defined as having at

least 1 NOSE class improvement or a NOSE score reduction of at least

20 %. There were no adverse changes in cosmetic appearance at 12

months post-procedure; 3 implants in 3 subjects required retrieval within

30 days post-procedure and resulted in no clinical sequelae". The

authors concluded that the findings of this study demonstrated safety and

effectiveness of an absorbable implant for lateral cartilage support in

subjects with NVC at 12 months post-procedure.

San Nicolo and colleagues (2018) noted that the safety and effectiveness

of an absorbable implant for lateral cartilage support have been recently

demonstrated in subjects with NVC at 12 months post-procedure (San

Nicolo et al, 2017). This follow-up study examined if the safety and

effectiveness of the implant persist in these patients for 24 months after

the procedure. A total of 30 subjects with NOSE score of greater than or

equal to 55 and isolated NVC were treated; 14 cases were performed in

an operating suite under general anesthesia and 16 cases were

performed in a clinic-based setting under local anesthesia. Subjects were

followed-up through 24 months post-procedure; 56 implants were placed

in 30 subjects. The mean pre-operative NOSE score was 76.7 ± 14.8,

with a range of 55 to 100. At 24 months, the mean score was 32.0 ± 29.3,

reflecting an average within-patient reduction of -44.0 ± 31.1 points.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

36/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

There were no device-related adverse events (AEs) in the 12 to 24

months period. There were 5 subjects who exited the study prior to the

24-month follow-up; 4 of the 5 subjects who exited were elected for

further intervention and 1 subject was lost to follow-up. The authors

concluded that the findings of this study demonstrated safety of an

absorbable implant for lateral nasal wall support and symptom

improvement in some subjects with NVC at 24 months post-procedure.

Moreover, these researchers stated that further studies with a larger

sample size and additional concomitant procedures would be valuable.

In addition, a trial beyond 24 months would be useful in understanding

the longer term benefits of the implant.

In a prospective, multi-center, non-randomized, single-blinded study,

Stolovitzky and co-workers (2018) examined 6-month outcomes for

treatment of lateral nasal wall insufficiency with a bio-absorbable implant.

A total of 101 patients with severe-to-extreme class of NOSE scores were

enrolled at 14 U.S. clinics (September 2016 to March 2017). Patients

were treated with a bio-absorbable implant designed to support lateral

wall, with or without concurrent septoplasty and/or turbinate reduction

procedure(s); NOSE scores VAS were measured at baseline and month

1, 3, and 6 post-operatively. The Lateral Wall Insufficiency (LWI) score

was determined by independent physicians observing the lateral wall

motion video. A total of 43 patients were treated with implant alone,

whereas 58 had adjunctive procedures; 17 patients reported 19 AEs, all

of which resolved with no clinical sequelae. Patients showed significant

reduction in NOSE scores at 1, 3, and 6 months post-operatively (79.5 ±

13.5 pre-operatively, 34.6 ± 25.0 at 1 month, 32.0 ± 28.4 at 3 months, and

30.6 ± 25.8 at 6 months post-operatively; p < 0.01 for all). They also

showed significant reduction in VAS scores post-operatively (71.9 ± 18.8

pre-operatively, 32.7 ± 27.1 at 1 month, 30.1 ± 28.3 at 3 months, and 30.7

± 29.6 at 6 months post-operatively; p < 0.01 for all). These results were

similar in patients treated with the implant alone compared to those

treated with the implant and adjunctive procedures. Consistent with

patient-reported outcomes, post-operative LWI scores were demonstrably

lower (1.83 ± 0.10 and 1.30 ± 0.11 pre- and post-operatively; p < 0.01).

The authors concluded that stabilization of the lateral nasal wall with a

bio-absorbable implant improved patients' nasal obstructive symptoms

over 6 months. Moreover, these investigators stated that the drawbacks

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

37/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

of this study included a single-arm study design with short-term follow-up

(6 months); they stated that a randomized, placebo-controlled trial is

needed.

An UpToDate review on "Clinical presentation, diagnosis, and treatment

of nasal obstruction" (Bhattacharyya, 2018) does not mention Latera or

nasal implant for rhinoplasty.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on "Etiologies of nasal symptoms: An

overview" (Wang, 2018) states that "External nasal valve weakness may

be congenital or a result of traumatic injury. Correction of nasal valve

weakness requires surgery using cartilage grafts to buttress and support

the existing cartilage". However, there is no mention on the use of

absorbable nasal implants.

Stolovitzky et al (2019) stated that dynamic NVC is a common factor

contributing to nasal obstruction; however, it is often under-diagnosed

and untreated. An in-office, minimally invasive procedure addressing

dynamic NVC uses a bio-absorbable implant (Latera) to support the

lateral nasal wall. In a prospective, multi-center, single-blinded,

randomized controlled trial (RCT) with sham control, these researchers

examined the safety and effectiveness of the treatment. This study

included 137 patients from 10 clinics; subjects were randomized into 2

arms: treatment arm (70 patients) and sham control arm (67 patients).

Outcome measures were followed through 3 months after the procedure.

The primary end-point was the responder rate (percentage of patients

with reduction in clinical severity by greater than or equal to 1 category or

greater than or equal to 20 % reduction in NOSE score). Before the

procedure, there were no statistically significant differences in patient

demographics and nasal obstruction symptom measures between the 2

arms. Three months after the procedure, responder rate was significantly

higher for the treatment arm compared to the control (82.5 % versus 54.7

%, p = 0.001). Patients in the treatment arm also had a significantly

greater decrease in NOSE score (-42.4 ± 23.4 versus -22.7 ± 27.9, p <

0.0001) and significantly lower VAS scores (-39.0 ± 29.7 versus -13.3 ±

30.0, p < 0.0001) than the sham control arm; 17 patients reported 19

procedure/implant-related AEs, all of which resolved with no clinical

sequelae. The authors concluded that this study showed the safety and

effectiveness of the bio-absorbable implant in reducing patients' nasal

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

38/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

obstruction symptoms. These researchers stated that this study had

several drawbacks. This study reported short-term follow-up data up to 3

months only. Furthermore, this was a single-blinded study in which all

patients were blinded but physicians were aware of the assignment,

which may have introduced risk of bias.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on "Nasal obstruction: Diagnosis and

management" (Bhattacharyya, 2020) does not mention absorbable nasal

implant as a therapeutic option.

In a prospective, non-randomized, multi-center study, Sidle et al (2020)

examined 12-month outcomes for in-office treatment of dynamic NVC

with a bio-absorbable implant. A total of 166 patients with severe-to-

extreme class of NOSE scores were enrolled at 16 U.S. clinics

(November 2016 to July 2017). Patients were treated with a bio-

absorbable implant (Latera) to support the lateral wall, with or without

concurrent inferior turbinate reduction (ITR), in an office setting. NOSE

scores and VAS were measured at baseline and 1, 3, 6, and 12 months

post-operatively. The LWI score was determined by independent

physicians observing the lateral wall motion video. A total of 105 patients

were treated with implant alone, whereas 61 had implant + ITR; 31

patients reported 41 AEs, all of which resolved with no clinical sequelae.

Patients showed significant reduction in NOSE scores throughout 12

months post-operatively (77.4 ± 13.4 baseline versus 36.2 ± 22.7 at 1

month post-operatively, 33.0 ± 23.4 at 3 months, 32.1 ± 24.6 at 6 months,

and 30.3 ± 24.3 at 12 months; p < 0.001). They also showed significant

reduction in VAS scores post-operatively (69.7 ± 18.1 baseline versus

31.3 ± 27.1 at 12 months post-operatively, p < 0.001). These findings

were similar in patients treated with implant alone and those treated with

the implant + ITR. Consistent with patient-reported outcomes, post-

operative LWI scores were demonstrably lower (1.42 ± 0.09 and 0.93 ±

0.08 pre- and post-operatively, p < 0.001). The authors concluded that in-

office treatment of dynamic NVC with a bio-absorbable implant improved

clinical evidence of LWI at 6 months and improved nasal obstructive

symptoms in a majority of patients up to 12 months. Moreover, these

researchers stated that longer follow-up is needed to determine efficacy

beyond 12 months. Level of Evidence = IIb.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

39/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

The authors stated that this study had several drawbacks. This was a

single-arm study comparing pre- and post-treatment measurements of

symptoms. A future RCT should be considered to further examine the

device efficacy. Follow-up for this study was limited to 12 months post-

procedure. Previously, animal histology studies have shown that an

implant of the same composition was absorbed over 18 to 24 months

after implantation, and that, upon complete absorption, the implant was

replaced with nodular bundles of mature collagenized fibrous tissue that

may provide mechanical strength at the lateral wall. Thus, additional

follow-up out to 24 months would be beneficial.

Brandon et al (2020) noted that internal nasal valve compromise is a

major cause of nasal obstruction, with a growing number of ways to treat

this condition. In a cadaveric study, these researchers compared the

effects of butterfly graft, spreader graft, and the bio-absorbable nasal

implant on nasal air-flow resistance. Computational fluid dynamics (CFD)

simulations were completed from 9 pre-operative and post-operative

cadaveric subjects. Each cadaveric head underwent placement of a bio-

absorbable nasal implant (BNI) (Spirox Latera), butterfly graft, or

spreader graft. Pre- and post-operative CT scans were used to generate

three-dimensional (3D) models of the nasal airway used in steady-state

CFD simulations of airflow and heat transfer during inspiration. Butterfly

graft placement resulted in a mean improvement in nasal airway

resistance of 24.9 % (± 7.3), whereas BNI placement resulted in a 6.7 %

(± 1.2) improvement, and spreader graft placement also resulted in a

consistent improvement of 2.6 % (± 13.5). Pressure within the main

nasal cavity was consistently lower following butterfly graft placement

versus a spreader graft or BNI. Butterfly and spreader graft placement

also resulted in modest improvements in airflow allocation, whereas BNI

demonstrated more variation (-1 % to 12 %). Heat flux was not

significantly different; however, a small improvement in total heat flux was

observed with all 3 interventions. The authors concluded that the findings

of this study demonstrated reduction in nasal airway resistance in all 3

surgical interventions, with the butterfly graft demonstrating superiority to

the other 2 techniques; however, these findings only reflected a static

environment and not dynamic changes in airflow observed during

respiration. Level of Evidence = NA.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

40/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Seyidova et al (2020) noted that persistent nasal airway obstruction

(NAO) due to mid-vault soft tissue collapse in patients following

rhinoplasty or nasal surgery is a clinical challenge for surgeons. An

absorbable lateral nasal wall implant is one option available to help treat

mid-vault soft tissue collapse and to improve NAO symptoms. Previous

studies have not examined its use in complex revision functional

rhinoplasty with respect to patient-reported outcomes. Data were

collected on all patients with a history of previous nasal procedures who

underwent Latera implant placement in conjunction with functional

rhinoplasty from January to December 2018. The NOSE and VAS were

used to evaluate functional outcomes. A total of 8 implants were placed

in 6 revision functional rhinoplasty patients with mid-vault collapse. All

patients responded to the survey. Mean follow-up was 16 ± 4 months.

There were no implant-related AEs. Mean NOSE score was 33 ± 33, and

mean VAS score was 20 ± 9. In total, 1 patient reported complete

resolution of NAO, whereas 2 patients reported mild, 1 reported

moderate, 1 reported severe, and 1 reported extreme symptoms; 4 of the

6 patients reported nasal obstruction improvement, with all reporting

improvement in mid-vault soft tissue collapse. Apart from being used in

nasal valve collapse treatment, a lateral nasal wall implant is a potentially

useful solution that may help surgeons improve patients' NAO symptoms

in complex functional rhinoplasty cases. However, in certain cases, a

patient's nasal obstructive symptoms may continue to be multi-factorial.

Kim et al (2020) stated that nasal obstruction is a common cause of

breathing problems with lateral wall insufficiency (LWI) a key anatomic

contributor. Recently, a bio-absorbable nasal implant was introduced to

correct LWI and treat nasal obstruction. In a systematic review with

meta-analysis, these researchers examined the effectiveness of the bio-

absorbable nasal implant for treating nasal obstruction caused by LWI. A

total of 5 databases (PubMed, SCOPUS, Embase, Web of Science, and

the Cochrane Database) were independently reviewed by 2 researchers,

starting at the earliest time-point recorded in the database to September

2019. Studies that scored endoscopic lateral wall movement and nasal

obstruction related to quality of life (QOL) post-operatively before and

after bio-absorbable nasal implants and those that compared the

outcomes of nasal implants (treatment group) with outcomes of sham

surgery (control group) were included in the analysis. A total of 5 studies

(396 patients) met the inclusion criteria. Bio-absorbable nasal implants

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

41/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

significantly reduced endoscopic lateral wall motion compared to pre-

treatment values and also improved QOL at 12 months post-operatively.

Most adverse effects following the nasal implant, such as skin or mucosal

reaction, infection, or implant retrieval, were reported with a 5 %

incidence rate. All adverse outcomes were resolved without significant

sequelae. Compared with sham surgery, bio-absorbable nasal implants

significantly improved disease-specific QOL. The authors concluded that

bio-absorbable nasal implants may reduce nasal wall movement and

subjective symptom scores compared to pre-operative status; however,

these researchers stated that more randomized clinical trials must be

conducted to further verify the effectiveness of bio-absorbable nasal

implants.

Sidle et al (2021) reported outcomes after treatment of NVC with a bio-

absorbable nasal implant. It involved 2 prospective, multi-center, post-

market studies evaluating long-term effectiveness of the Latera implant

for severe-to-extreme nasal obstruction. Subjects underwent implant

alone or with concomitant ITR and/or septoplasty. Outcome measures

included the change from baseline NOSE scores, NOSE responder rates,

VAS scores, and AEs. A total cohort of 277 subjects (109 implants only,

67 implants + ITR, 101 implants + septoplasty + ITR) enrolled at 19 U.S.

centers was available for analysis with 177 subjects (69 implants only, 39

implants + ITR, 69 implants + septoplasty + ITR) available at 2 years.

The mean changes from baseline in NOSE scores and VAS scores were

statistically significant (p < 0.001) at all follow-up periods . The baseline

NOSE score of 77.8 ± 13.6 was improved to 24.2 ± 23.6 at 24 months.

Greater than 90 % of subjects were NOSE responders across all follow-

up periods, 6.1 % withdrew for lack of treatment effect. The baseline VAS

score of 66.7 ± 18.8 was improved to 21.1 ± 23.9 at 24 months. There

were no serious AEs related to the device or implant procedure. Implant

retrieval rate was 4.0 % (22/543 implants). Non-serious AEs were mild-

to-moderate in severity, typically occurred within 6 months of implant, and

resolved or were stable. Significant reductions in NOSE and VAS scores

and high responder rates from the large population of patients with nasal

obstruction who had nasal valve implants confirmed sustained

effectiveness at 24 months after treatment.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

42/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

The authors stated that the lack of a control group was the principal

limitation of this study. Although these were single-arm studies

comparing pre-treatment with post-treatment outcomes within patient, a

recent RCT (Stolovitzky et al, 2019) has demonstrated the superiority of

the implant over a sham procedure for the treatment of NVC. 2nd

limitation of this study was that the initial study design only included

follow-up through 12 months. The long-term follow-up amendment

required additional consent and resulted in some loss to follow-up at long-

term visits. Furthermore, 2 patients withdrew due to implant retrieval

before any follow-up data were obtained. To address this limitation, a

worst-case sensitivity analysis was performed. The analysis showed that

significant symptom improvement persisted under these extremely

conservative imputation assumptions. Thus, despite the loss to follow-up,

these investigators believed the 24-month results were reliable.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Nasal obstruction: Diagnosis and

management” (Bhattacharyya, 2021) does not mention Latera / bio-

absorbable nasal implant as a management / therapeutic option.

Bikhazi et al (2022) reported the long-term safety and effectiveness of the

treatment and cross-over arms of a randomized controlled trial (RCT)

examining an absorbable nasal implant to address dynamic nasal valve

collapse. Subjects were adults with severe/extreme nasal airway

obstruction primarily due to nasal valve insufficiency who had implant

placement. Follow-up visits were at 3-, 6-, 12-, 18-, and 24-month post-

implant. Visits included collection of the following patient-reported

outcome measures (PROMs): nasal obstructive symptom evaluation

(NOSE), nasal obstruction visual analog scale (VAS), and the Epworth

Sleepiness Scale (ESS). Adverse events (AEs) were evaluated at each

visit. A total of 111 subjects with implants were followed. Of the 111, 90

completed the 12-month visit and 70 completed the 24-month visit..

NOSE responder rates were greater than 80 % at all follow-ups through

24 months. Mean reduction from baseline in NOSE scores was 30 points

or more and statistically significant (p < 0.001) at all time-points through

24 months. Mean VAS score reduction was 29.7 points or higher and

statistically significant (p < 0.001) at all time-points. The subgroup of

subjects with baseline ESS values of greater than 10 experienced

statistically significant (p < 0.001) and clinically meaningful reductions at

all post-implant periods, suggesting that the reduction in nasal symptoms

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

43/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

may reduce daytime sleepiness for patients who have problems with

sleep quality. No serious device-/procedure-related AEs were reported.

Implant migration/retrieval rate was 4.5 % (10/222) of total implants or 9

% of subjects (10/111). The authors concluded that the implant was safe

and effective for dynamic nasal valve collapse in patients with

severe/extreme nasal obstruction and provided durable symptom

improvement 24 months after placement.

The authors stated that study limitations included the lack of long-term

follow-up of the control arm, significant loss of subjects to follow-up at 18

and 24 months, and a lack of objective assessment of nasal valve

collapse. Subjects who had received the sham procedure and continued

to meet all inclusion criteria could cross-over to the treatment arm at 3

months. As noted, 40 of the 66 sham subjects crossed-over to the

treatment group. By study design, the 26 remaining sham subjects exited

from the study after 3 months. Once the initial, 3-month randomized

comparison established that the treatment arm was superior to the sham

arm, the study designers/authors felt it would be unethical to continue

long-term follow-up of the sham subjects without allowing the remaining

subjects who still met inclusion criteria the opportunity to cross-over to the

treatment arm. While this lack of long-term follow-up of the control arm

may be seen as a limitation of the study, it was unlikely that any placebo

effect that was not noted during the initial 3-month interval would have

presented in later months. The loss of treatment subjects at 18 and 24

months, which was due in part to the coronavirus-19 pandemic (COVID-

19) of 2020, also presented a limitation to the study. A last observation

carried forward (LOCF) analysis was carried out to examine the impact of

subject drop-out over time. To address concerns regarding the validity of

the long-term analysis with LOCF, a worst-case scenario analysis was

also carried out, that validated the findings of the LOCF analysis. This

trial employed subjective patient assessments of nasal obstruction to

examine treatment outcome effect. A more objective evaluation of nasal

valve collapse, such as computed calculation of change in area of the

nasal valve through endoscopic video or photo could be considered in

future studies. While that type of objective analysis of nasal valve

response would provide valuable data, validated patient symptom scores

are useful, especially when counseling patients on potential treatment

outcome/expectations. Lastly, a notable limitation of this study was an

uneven distribution of subject of varying race or ethnicity. While the

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

44/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

enrolled population of non-White subjects was low at 14 %, significant

attempts were made in the study design to find a diverse population, such

as the inclusion of 10 clinical sites across multiple geographies. While all

attempts to find a diverse population were made, inherent bias toward

White subjects may exist. Previous studies have demonstrated racial

differences in nasal anatomy that may contribute to under-representation

of some ethnic groups. For example, Morgan et al (1995) demonstrated

that Blacks have a larger minimum cross-sectional area (CSA) as well as

less nasal resistance in comparison to Caucasians; therefore, may be

less likely to need nasal surgery. Furthermore, to nasal anatomy

variations, differences in cultural views toward surgery, or inequality in

clinician attitude may influence the ethnic subsets enrolled in studies such

as in this.

Kim et al (2020) stated that nasal obstruction is a common cause of

breathing problems with lateral wall insufficiency (LWI) a key anatomic

contributor. Recently, a bio-absorbable nasal implant was introduced to

correct LWI and treat nasal obstruction. In a systematic review and meta-

analysis, these researchers examined the effectiveness of the bio-

absorbable nasal implant for treating nasal obstruction caused by LWI. A

total of 5 databases (PubMed, SCOPUS, Embase, Web of Science, and

the Cochrane Database) were independently reviewed by 2 researchers,

starting at the earliest time-point recorded in the database to September

2019. Studies that scored endoscopic lateral wall movement and nasal

obstruction related to QOL post-operatively before and after bio-

absorbable nasal implants and those that compared the outcomes of

nasal implants (treatment group) with outcomes of sham surgery (control

group) were included in the analysis. A total of 5 studies (396 patients)

met the inclusion criteria. Bio-absorbable nasal implants significantly

reduced endoscopic lateral wall motion compared to pre-treatment values

and also improved QOL at 12 months post-operatively. Most adverse

effects following the nasal implant, such as skin or mucosal reaction,

infection, or implant retrieval, were reported with a 5 % incidence rate. All

adverse outcomes were resolved without significant sequelae.

Compared with sham surgery, bio-absorbable nasal implants significantly

improved disease-specific QOL. The authors concluded that bio-

absorbable nasal implants may reduce nasal wall movement and

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

45/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

subjective symptom scores compared to pre-operative status. Moreover,

these researchers stated that more RCTs must be carried out to further

verify the effectiveness of bio-absorbable nasal implants.

The authors stated that although this study offered supporting evidence

for the use of a bio-absorbable implant in patients with nasal valve

collapse due to LWI, the number of enrolled studies (and patients) and

short follow-up periods limited the generalizability of these findings.

These investigators stated that larger, comparative studies or well-

designed RCTs with outcomes based on validated PROMs are still

needed to provide more definitive recommendations.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Etiologies of nasal symptoms: An

overview” (Wang, 2023) states that “The most common cause of internal

nasal valve weakness is iatrogenic, resulting from overzealous cartilage

resection during rhinoplasty. The internal nasal valve may also be

weakened by nasal trauma. External nasal valve weakness may be

congenital or a result of traumatic injury. Correction of nasal valve

weakness requires surgery using cartilage grafts to buttress and support

the existing cartilage. A synthetic, bio-absorbable spreader graft implant

has also been found to be effective in correcting nasal valve weakness

[Kim et al, 2020]”.

Wilkins et al (2023) noted that bio-absorbable implants (e.g., Latera) have

recently been approved for addressing NVC. These researchers

summarized AEs and treatment sequelae associated with bio-absorbable

nasal implants queried in the Manufacturer and User Facility Device

Experience (MAUDE) database. Of the 26 device reports entered

between March 2017 and April 2022, the most frequently reported

complications included abscess (n = 13) and implant protrusion (n = 5).

Other common symptoms reported greater than 1-year post-implantation

included facial pain/discomfort (n = 3) and failure to absorb (n = 3).

Management of AEs included treatment with antibiotics (n = 9), steroid

injections (n = 4), and explantation (n = 20). In 3 reports, adverse

reactions required a biopsy of adjacent tissue for pathologic analysis.

The authors concluded that these findings suggested that further

investigation is needed to evaluate the potential long-term complications

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

46/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

and optimize the management of bio-absorbable nasal implants. In

addition, standardized reporting templates may improve the utility of the

MAUDE database.

In a retrospective, cohort study, Vo et al (2024) compared all-cause

claims associated with the Latera absorbable nasal implant and surgical

repair of nasal vestibular stenosis in patients with NVC. These

investigators used data from STATinMED RWD Insights. A defined set of

HCPCS, ICD-10-CM and CPT codes were employed to identify patients

with 1 or more claim for a Latera procedure, and patients with 1 or more

claim for surgical repair between June 1, 2015 and March 31, 2023.

Patients with continuous capture for at least 12 months before and at

least 6 months after the index date were selected. The index date was

defined as earliest date of encounter for a Latera or surgical repair

procedure. Inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) was used to

ensure balance between cohorts. Descriptive analyses were provided for

all claims data using standard summary statistics. All-cause claims were

assessed during the baseline, index date, and follow-up period. Chi-

squared tests and independent sample t-tests were used to examine

differences in cohorts for categorical and continuous variables,

respectively. The study population included 5,032 Latera patients and

26,553 surgical repair patients. During the baseline and follow-up

periods, the matched cohorts exhibited similar all-cause claims. On the

index date, Latera patients incurred lower claims versus surgical repair,

likely due to Latera’s ability to be implanted in the physician office

setting. Latera patients and surgical repair patients mean (SD) total costs

were $9,612 [$14,930] versus $11,846 [$17,037] (p ≤ 0.0001),

respectively. The authors concluded that treatment with the Latera

absorbable nasal implant was a potentially cost-saving option for payers

on the index date compared to traditional surgical repair in patients with

NVC due to the ability to be carried out in the office setting. All-cause

claims were similar in the baseline and follow-up periods. When

performed with concomitant procedures, all-cause claims during follow-up

were similar between groups. Moreover, these researchers stated that

the overall economic impact of innovative therapeutic options such as

Latera have yet to be analyzed. Various studies have examined the

effect of absenteeism and socioeconomic benefit of less invasive care.

For example, patients were able to recover faster and return to work

earlier, increasing productivity and decreasing healthcare resource

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

47/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

utilization as compared to more complex and invasive procedures. In an

era of healthcare consumerism and employer-based insurance

environments, less or minimally invasive procedures may be preferred by

both patients and employers. These investigators stated that

recommendations for future research include using only data from 2021

on for a uniform Latera CPT code, analyzing NAO-specific related

resource utilization and costs, and the greater economic impact of NAO

treatment.

An UpToDate review on “Etiologies of nasal symptoms: An overview”

(Wang, 2024) stated that “The most common cause of internal nasal

valve weakness is iatrogenic, resulting from overzealous cartilage

resection during rhinoplasty. The internal nasal valve may also be

weakened by nasal trauma. External nasal valve weakness may be

congenital or a result of traumatic injury. Correction of nasal valve

weakness requires surgery using cartilage grafts to buttress and support

the existing cartilage. A synthetic, bioabsorbable spreader graft implant

has also been found to be effective in correcting nasal valve weakness

[Wang et al, 2020]”.

Concentrated Growth Factors Extracted from Blood Plasma for

Repair of Nasal Septal Mucosal Defect Following Rhinoplasty

Zhao and colleagues (2020) examined the effect of concentrated growth

factor (CGF) for repair of nasal septal mucosal defect following

rhinoplasty. A total of 10 women with mucosal defects of the nasal

septum were enrolled from May 2017 to May 2018. Liquid and gel CGF

was prepared from each patient's blood sample using a Medifuge system,

including benchtop centrifuge. After debridement of the defect, the

prepared liquid CGF was injected around the wound, and a membranous

CGF film was applied to the surface. Vaseline gauze was used to pack

the nostrils. All patients were treated with CGF at intervals from 3 to 5

days. After 3 to 12 treatments, all the patients achieved successful repair

of the nasal septal mucosal defect, with good appearance and function.

During a follow-up of 3 to 6 months, no recurrence was observed. The

authors concluded that CGF appeared to have great curative effect for

patients with nasal septal mucosal defects following rhinoplasty. Level of

Evidence = IV. These preliminary findings needed to be validated by

well-designed studies.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

48/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Rhinoplasty and External Nasal Splinting

Challita and colleagues (2019) noted that rhinoplasty is a common and

challenging procedure. Lateral osteotomy is routinely performed in most

cases. Most of the surgeons have the habit of applying external nasal

splints to stabilize the nasal tissues and bone in their new position post-

rhinoplasty. These splints are widely used despite the absence of any

evidence supporting this practice. Moreover, these splints have a lot of

disadvantages, thus, these researchers examined the cosmetic result in

their absence. A retrospective, cross-sectional study was carried out.

Medical records of 211 patients operated on for rhinoplasty by the same

surgeon from 2015 to 2017 were reviewed. All patients were operated

using open technique. After surgery, a Steri-Strips dressing with an

overlying layer of surgical tape was applied to the nose without the use of

an external nasal splint. Most of the patients were followed-up for 18

months. Complication rates, revision rates, and nasal bone widths were

recorded. Complication rates and revision rates were as follows: skin

infection = 0.99 %, skin necrosis = 0.99 %, and secondary revision =

3.48 %. Finally 79.6 % of patients had a decrease in their nasal bone

width post-surgery. The authors concluded that based on the present

study, external nasal splinting post-rhinoplasty should not be routinely

used. Satisfactory cosmetic results could be obtained while avoiding the

complications, cost, and bulky dressings associated with external splints.

These researchers stated that a causal relationship could not be

assessed due to the absence of a control group. Therefore, RCTs

comparing the outcome with and without splinting post-rhinoplasty are

needed to determine if external nasal splints are really a must.

Ablation of Septal Swell Bodies for the Treatment of Nasal

Obstruction, Chronic Rhinitis, or Chronic Sinusitis

Wotman and Kacker (2015) noted that the nasal septal swell body (NSB)

is a distinct structure of the anterior nasal septum. Comprised of septal

cartilage, bone, and a thick mucosal lining, the NSB is visible on

endoscopic examination and radiographic study. However, it receives

little attention in the clinical setting and can be confused with high septal

deviation. Based on anatomical and histological evidence, investigators

theorize that the NSB plays an important role in nasal airflow regulation

and humidification. These investigators examined if otolaryngologists

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

49/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

should pay more attention to this structure, especially as it relates to

nasal obstruction? The authors concluded that according to the current

literature, the NSB possesses venous sinusoids and seromucinous

glands, is located in or near the distal segment of the internal nasal valve,

is common in patients with symptoms of chronic sinusitis, and is linked to

septal deviation and allergic rhinitis; thus, otolaryngologists should pay

more attention to this structure, especially as it may play a role in

regulating nasal airflow and humidifying inspired air. The studies

analyzed in this review were of level III evidence.

Catalano and colleagues (2015) stated that anatomic etiologies of nasal

obstruction (NO) include septal deviation, turbinate hypertrophy, and

nasal valve collapse. These investigators have also noted that NSB are

very common and can produce a significant effect on nasal resistance.

They examined changes in validated outcome metrics following surgical

reduction of NSB. A total of 60 consecutive patients (38 men: 22 women)

were enrolled after persistent NO following septoplasty, turbinate

reduction and internal nasal valve repair. Clinical history and nasal

endoscopy confirmed prominent NSB. Evaluation of treatment effect was

determined by changes in the NOSE scale and a newly developed NSB

grading scale before, and 6 months after swell body ablation in the office

setting using Coblation. NSB grades were based on endoscopic

visualization of the middle turbinate (MT): 1 = greater than 50 % MT

visualized; 2 = less than 50 % MT visualized; 3 = no MT visualized.

Patient data were scored and transferred for analysis using Prism6

Graph Pad software. Subjects in this study had a mean age of 48 years

(range of 19 to 71) and were followed for 3 and 6 months. The mean pre-

operative NOSE score was 41.6 and mean NSB grade was 2.5. At 3

months, the mean post-operative NOSE score was 17 with NSB grade of

1. At 6 months, the NOSE score was 21 and the NSB grade was 1.2 (p <

0.05); therefore, statistically significant improvement in NOSE scores and

standardized NSB grading was noted at 3 and 6 months post-Coblation of

NSB tissue. There was 1 asymptomatic small septal perforation noted,

and 5 patients needed re-treatment at 6 months. The authors concluded

that Coblation reduction of NSB was a new, safe and effective office-

based therapeutic option for the correction of refractory NO.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

50/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

The authors stated that radiofrequency ablation (RFA) has become an

accepted method for tissue reduction in the inferior turbinate in the office

setting under local anesthesia, thus this technique was slightly modified

for treatment of the NSB. The long-term efficacy of this procedure

(greater than 2 years) has not yet been studied, as the procedure is new

and follow-up time reported was limited to 6 months. These researchers

did see the need to retreat 5/60 patients after 6 months due to the

presence of new NSB, either contralateral to the treated side, or anterior

to the original NSB on the ipsilateral side. All 5 patients were previously

diagnosed with vasomotor rhinitis, a well-known vasoactive disease

process. In general, one might postulate that the durability of NSB RFA

would mirror RFA of the inferior turbinate since the vasoactive tissues are

similar, but this is yet unproven. These researchers stated that further

studies to demonstrate the long-term effectiveness of this treatment are

needed and underway, yet this simple procedure has yielded significant

improvements in their patient population, and is an important adjunct to

any nasal airway procedure in patients with obstructive sleep apnea,

snoring, allergic rhinitis, and other types of NO.

In a retrospective study, Kim and associates (2016) presented the

preliminary findings of Coblation NSB reduction for the treatment of NO in

patients with abnormally thickened NSB. The trial was carried out at a

single tertiary medical center; 8 patients underwent Coblation NSB

reduction. Pre-operative and post-operative nasal functions were

evaluated by acoustic rhinometry and subjective symptom scales. These

investigators also analyzed pre-operative CT scan images and nasal

endoscopic findings. The mean maximal NSB width was 16.4 ± 2.2 mm

on pre-operative coronal CT scan images. The mean visual analog scale

(VAS) score for NO was decreased from pre-operative 7.63 ± 0.99 points

to 3.88 ± 0.92 points (post-operative 3 months), 4.16 ± 0.78 points (post-

operative 6 months), and 4.63 ± 0.69 points (post-operative 1 year); 6 of

the 8 patients were satisfied with the clinical outcome at 1 year after the

procedure. The authors concluded that to the best of their knowledge,

Coblation NSB reduction has not yet been reported in the medical

literature; these preliminary findings showed that it could be an effective

therapeutic option for nasal valve narrowing in patients with abnormally

thickened NSB. These findings need to be validated by well-designed

studies.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

51/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Pyriform Aperture Reduction (Pyriform Turbinoplasty) for the

Treatment of Nasal Obstruction

Silva Merea and associates (2015) noted that congenital pyriform

aperture stenosis (CPAS) is a form of nasal obstruction caused by

congenital narrowing of the maxilla at the medial processes. Traditionally,

surgical correction involves a sub-labial approach with sub-periosteal

dissection, widening of the aperture by drilling, and the use of nasal

stents post-operatively. Although this approach may lead to symptomatic

improvement, it alone may fail to provide a patent airway secondary to

unaddressed posterior narrowing. Additionally, the use of stents was

problematic because they were prone to clogging and could cause

internal nasal scarring and septal or alar necrosis. In a retrospective

chart review, these researchers presented the surgical management of

this condition in 6 patients using a novel approach that aimed to correct

these limitations by including both the traditional sub-labial procedure and

an endo-nasal reduction of the inferior turbinates, without the use of

stents post-operatively. A review of the medical records of 6 consecutive

patients aged 2 weeks to 7 months, who underwent repair of CPAS via a

sub-labial ostectomy and endo-nasal inferior turbinate reduction from

2009 to 2012 was performed. All 6 patients were cleared of airway

obstruction post-operatively and at follow-up. The authors concluded that

this was an alternative approach that led to symptomatic improvement for

CPAS patients without the morbidity associated with stent use. Level of

evidence = IV.

Simmen and co-workers (2015) described a new procedure, pyriform

turbinoplasty; and nasal airflow was measured before and after this

procedure in a virtual model. Pyriform turbinoplasty is the submucosal

reduction of the bone of the frontal process of the maxilla and the lacrimal

bone. It opens part of the lateral margin of the nasal valve area with

minimal damage to nasal mucosa. The resection of bone in this area

could be extended by "nasal wall lateralization" when the lacrimal bone

that joins the uncinate process behind the lacrimal duct as well as the

base of the inferior turbinate and the edge of the maxilla at the rim of the

pyriform aperture are removed. Nasal airflow was simulated using

computational fluid dynamics and ANSYS Fluent solver. Analysis using

fluid dynamics showed that these procedures help ventilation in the main

airflow areas without substantially altering the normal pattern of airflow.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

52/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

The authors concluded that changes after performing a pyriform

turbinoplasty appeared to be an improvement when compared to the

changes after inferior turbinate surgery that could misdirect the airflow

largely through the inferior meatus.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on "Nasal obstruction: Diagnosis and

management" (Bhattacharyya, 2020) does not mention pyriform aperture

reduction (pyriform turbinoplasty) as a therapeutic option.

Balloon Septoplasty is for the Treatment for Nasal Fracture and

Septal Deviation

UpToDate reviews on “Initial evaluation and management of facial trauma

in adults” (Mayersak, 2021), “Nasal trauma and fractures in children and

adolescents” (Mendez and Lapointe, 2021), “Assessment and

management of facial lacerations” (Hollander, 2021) “Patient education:

Nose fracture (The Basics)” (Written by the doctors and editors at

UpToDate, 2021), “Nasal obstruction: Diagnosis and management”

(Bhattacharyya, 2021), and “Patient education: Deviated septum (The

Basics)” (Written by the doctors and editors at UpToDate, 2021) do not

mention balloon septoplasty as a management / therapeutic option.

Septoplasty with Turbinate Reduction for Nasal Obstruction Due to Deviated Nasal Septum

Bin Lajdam et al (2022) stated that compensatory inferior turbinate

hypertrophy is a common accompanying manifestation in patients with

nasal obstruction due to deviated nasal septum (DNS). The grounds for

inferior turbinate reduction (ITR) in this population are still not well

established. In a systematic review and meta-analysis, these

investigators examined the safety and effectiveness of septoplasty with

ITR versus septoplasty alone. They carried out computerized search in

Medline, Embase, and CENTRAL. Eligible for inclusion were RCTs

comparing septoplasty to septoplasty with unilateral, contralateral, ITR in

adults with DNS. Primary outcomes were health-related QOL (HR-QOL)

and nasal patency. The secondary outcome was the occurrence of AEs;

standardized mean differences (SMD) and odds ratios (OR) with 95 %

confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated. A total of 12 RCTs that

enrolled 775 subjects were found eligible. Data were reported at follow-

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

53/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

up periods ranging from 1 month to 48 months. The pooled effect

estimate showed a statistically significant improvement with unilateral,

contralateral, ITR in NOSE scores. The rate of AEs was significantly

higher with ITR. The authors concluded that unilateral reduction of the

hypertrophied contralateral inferior turbinate during septoplasty resulted

in better subjective relief of nasal obstruction in adults with DNS than

septoplasty alone. However, caution is needed since only few well-

designed RCTs were identified.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Nasal obstruction: Diagnosis and

management” (Bhattacharyya, 2022) states that “Nasal septal deviation --

Septoplasty is the definitive treatment in patients with nasal obstruction

due to septal deviation. Reported rates of long-term efficacy vary, but

one study reported that septoplasty was successful in reducing nasal

symptoms in up to 89 % of patients”. However, this UpToDate review

does not mention the use of inferior turbinate reduction as an adjunctive

treatment for nasal obstruction due to septal deviation.

Use of Autologous Cartilage / Diced Cartilage Wrapped with Blood

Products in Rhinoplasty

Wu et al (2022) noted that rhinoplasty is one of the most common

operations in plastic and aesthetic surgery. Both solid silicone material

and autologous cartilage (AC) tissue have their individual advantages and

disadvantages. In a meta-analysis, these investigators examined the

effectiveness, complication rate of rhinoplasty with AC and silicone

material. They searched Medline, Embase, PubMed, China National

Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI) and Wanfang by rapid matching of

keywords to obtain RCTs related to AC rhinoplasty or silicone filled

rhinoplasty, which were analyzed using the software Stata 16.0 after

screening and quality assessment. A total of 1,233 patients undergoing

rhinoplasty from 7 articles were included in the study. Meta-analysis

showed that rhinoplasty with AC would gain more satisfaction (risk ratio

[RR] = 1.11; 95 % CI: 1.02 to 1.21; Z = 2.413; p = 0.016); would reduce

the complication rate [RR = 0.34; 95 % CI: 0.22 to 0.52; Z = -5.010; p <

0.0001); and resulting in less secondary surgery rate [RR = 0.34; 95 %

CI: 0.18 to 0.64; Z = -3.363; p = 0.001] comparing to silicone prosthesis

(SP) material. The authors concluded that in rhinoplasty, the use of AC

material resulted in more satisfaction, had less total complication rate,

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

54/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

and led to less secondary surgery rate than SP material. However, these

researchers stated that based on the heterogeneity and publication bias

in the included studies, this topic still needs to be further examined by

including more high-quality RCTs in clinical practice.

Dong et al (2022) stated that diced cartilage has been widely used in

rhinoplasty, especially for segmental dorsal augmentation, with favorable

outcomes over time. Various techniques were developed to increase

both stability and viability of diced cartilage, including wrappings with non-

blood material/blood products and changing the shapes of the diced

cartilage, while the optimal technique is inconclusive. In a systematic

review, these investigators examined the current strategies of diced

cartilage technique for rhinoplasty, emphasizing the value of various

wrapping materials. Free diced cartilage has a potential risk of gathering

in certain regions and causing post-operative irregularities. Among non-

blood wrapping materials, Surgicel is now rarely used due to severe

foreign body reactions. The obvious drawbacks of fascia are donor site

morbidity, inadequate quantity, and time-consuming. Although diced

cartilage wrapped in tutoplast-processed fascia lata, AlloDerm, or

esterified hyaluronic acid (HA) has achieved primary encouraging results,

the increased inflammation raised controversies regarding their clinical

use. The authors stated that diced cartilage wrapped with blood products

(e.g., concentrated growth factor, or platelet-rich fibrin) achieved long-

term reliable aesthetic results, and shaved cartilage and ultra-diced

cartilage have recently shown satisfactory clinical outcomes. However,

further investigation is still needed. Level of Evidence = IV.

Nasal Septal Button for Non-Surgical Closure of Septal Perforations

Taylor and Sherris (2015) noted that prosthetics serve as an option for the

treatment of naso-septal perforation in patients who have active systemic

disease, are poor surgical candidates, or wish to avoid surgery. These

investigators carried out a systematic review of the literature on

prosthetics for naso-septal perforation treatment. They examined

previous studies, assessed the success rate for naso-septal prosthetics,

provided evidence-based guidelines for naso-septal prosthetic use, and

identified areas for further investigation. Data sources included Cochrane

Controlled Trials Register, Embase, PubMed, and Web of Science. Data

sources were queried for relevant articles published from 1965 to 2013.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

55/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Studies were selected for inclusion if they presented primary data for

human naso-septal perforation treatment employing prosthetic materials.

Each included study's level of evidence and risk of bias were identified;

and grades of recommendation were assigned. A quantitative meta-

analysis was carried out on studies with low risk of bias. The search

yielded 4,756 abstracts for review, with 23 included case series and 5

case reports; 706 total cases of prosthetic naso-septal perforation

treatment were identified. All studies provided level 4 evidence, with an

overall conclusion grade of C for improvement in naso-septal perforation

symptoms, prosthetic in-situ rate, and complication rate. Meta-analysis of

6 low-risk-of-bias studies with 297 patients showed an overall success

rate of 65 %. The authors concluded that the literature provided level 4

evidence for the safety and effectiveness of prosthetics for naso-septal

perforation treatment with favorable success rates and few reports of

complications (only 1 fungal infection and 9 unspecified infections) in 706

cases.

Zaoui et al (2016) stated that perforations of the nasal septum could be

very disturbing for patients due to increased crust formation, nose bleeds,

obstruction of nasal breathing and whistling sounds during nasal

breathing. In a retrospective study, these researchers examined how the

symptom burden could be alleviated by custom-made silicone buttons

derived from an impression mold. This trial was performed to evaluate 45

patients with symptomatic septal perforations, who have been treated

over a period of 8 years. The magnitude and localization of the

perforations were measured on the impression molds as well as in-situ in

28 patients. The symptoms were rated on a VAS before and after

treatment (response 64 %). No correlation was found between the size of

the perforation and the distance from the nasal opening. Of the patients

31 (69 %) still had the septal button in-situ at the time of the last follow-

up. The magnitude and localization of the perforation were not found to

be predictors of treatment success. The following symptoms showed a

highly significant improvement: crust formation (VAS median 75 versus

31), nose bleeds (VAS median 50 versus 0), obstruction of nasal

breathing (VAS median 84 versus 14) and whistling breathing sounds

(VAS median 69 versus 0). Unpleasant odor and symptoms of sinusitis

did not show significant changes. The long-term septal button carriers

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

56/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

rated the improvement with a median of 91 % on the VAS. The authors

concluded that the majority of patients were extremely satisfied because

the symptom burden could be markedly reduced.

Non-Surgical Correction of Surgical Rhinoplasty Complications with

Hyaluronic Acid Fillers

Harb and Abdul-Razzak (2024) noted that surgical rhinoplasty is a highly

complex cosmetic procedure with significant revision rates.

Unfortunately, surgical revision rhinoplasty is associated with many

challenges. Non-surgical correction of surgical rhinoplasty complications

with injectable hyaluronic acid (HA) fillers is an alternative with less cost

and down-time. In a retrospective chart review, these investigators

presented their experience with 2,088 cases of non-surgical revision

rhinoplasty, including technical considerations, patient-reported outcomes

(PROs), and AEs. This review was completed on patients 18 years of

age or older who received non-surgical rhinoplasty treatment between

March 2018 and August 2022. Patient demographic data, and data on

indications for treatment, volume of filler used, patient-reported

satisfaction, and AEs (including erythema, infection, vascular occlusion,

and necrosis) were collected up to 1 year after the initial injection. A total

of 2,088 patient cases were included in this study. The most common

indications for treatment included bridge collapse or asymmetry (49.0 %),

an under-projected tip (44.0 %), and surface irregularity/scarring (35.4

%). The mean volume of filler used at initial treatment was 0.49 ml (SD

0.19). Median patient satisfaction immediately after treatment was 9

(VAS ranging from 1 to 10). The most common AE reported at the 2-

week follow-up was erythema (36.4 %). A total of 3 patients presented

with skin necrosis (0.47 %); all 3 of these complications were transient

and self-resolving. The authors concluded that non-surgical correction of

rhinoplasty complications with HA fillers could be a safe, minimally

invasive option with high patient satisfaction and immediate and

predictable results. These investigators stated that this approach should

be tried first before surgical revision.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

57/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Glossary of Terms

Term

Definition

Epistaxis

Nosebleed

Pyriform aperture Anterior opening of the nasal cavity in the skull

Swell body

A widened region of the nasal septum located superior to the

inferior turbinates and anterior to the middle turbinates

References

The above policy is based on the following references:

1. Ahmed MB, Al-Mohannadi FS, Elzawawi KE, et al. Excision and

reconstruction of dorsal nasal mucous cyst using dorsal nasal

ﬂap technique: A case report and literature review. J Surg Case

Rep. 2023;2023(12):rjad667.

2. American Academy of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery

(AAOHNS). Septoplasty. Clinical Indicators Compendium.

Alexandria, VA: AAOHNS; 1998.

3. Andrades P, Pereira N, Borel C, et al. A new approach to

nasoseptal fractures: Submucosal endoscopically assisted

septoplasty and closed nasal reduction. J Craniomaxillofac Surg.

2016;44(10):1635-1640.

4. André RF, Vuyk HD. Nasal valve surgery; our experience with the

valve suspension technique. Rhinology. 2008;46(1):66-69.

5. Arosarena OA. Cleft lip and palate. Otolaryngol Clin North Am.

2007;40(1):27-60, vi.

6. Awan MS, Iqbal M. Nasal packing after septoplasty: A

randomized comparison of packing versus no packing in 88

patients. Ear Nose Throat J. 2008;87(11):624-627.

7. Banglawala SM, Gill M, Sommer DD, et al. Is nasal packing

necessary after septoplasty? A meta-analysis. Int Forum Allergy

Rhinol. 2013;3(5):418-424.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

58/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

8. Banhiran W, Casiano RR. Endoscopic sinus surgery for benign

and malignant nasal and sinus neoplasm. Curr Opin Otolaryngol

Head Neck Surg. 2005;13(1):50-54.

9. Batra PS, Citardi MJ. Endoscopic management of sinonasal

malignancy. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2006;39(3):619-637.

10. Baumann I. Septoplasty update. Laryngorhinootologie.

2010;89(6):373-384.

11. Bessonov SN. Rhinoplasty in cases of congenital upper cleft lips.

Stomatologiia (Mosk). 2005;84(3):64-67.

12. Bhattacharyya N. Clinical presentation, diagnosis, and treatment

of nasal obstruction. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA:

UpToDate; reviewed October 2018.

13. Bhattacharyya N. Nasal obstruction: Diagnosis and management.

UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed

September 2020; November 2022.

14. Bikhazi N, Ow RA, O'Malley EM, et al. Long-term follow-up from

the treatment and crossover arms of a randomized controlled

trial of an absorbable nasal implant for dynamic nasal valve

collapse. Facial Plast Surg. 2022;38(5):495-503.

15. Bin Lajdam G, Alaryani K, Ghaddaf AA, et al. Septoplasty versus

septoplasty with turbinate reduction for nasal obstruction due to

deviated nasal septum: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Rhinology. 2022;60(6):411-420.

16. Brandon BM, Stepp WH, Basu S, et al. Nasal airﬂow changes with

bioabsorbable implant, butterﬂy, and spreader grafts.

Laryngoscope. 2020;130(12):E817-E823.

17. Bresler A, Povolotskiy R, Nguyen B, et al. Functional and aesthetic

outcomes of extracorporeal septoplasty: A sstematic review and

meta-analyses. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2020;129(4):401-410.

18. Catalano P, Ashmead MG, Carlson D. Radiofrequency ablation of

septal swell body. Ann Otolaryngol Rhinol. 2015;2(11): 1069.

19. Challita R, Shouman M, Ghanime G. Rhinoplasty and external

nasal splinting: Is it really a must? Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open.

2019;7(8):e2374.

20. Champagne C, Ballivet de Regloix S, Genestier L, et al. Endoscopic

vs. conventional septoplasty: A review of the literature. Eur Ann

Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Dis. 2016;133(1):43-46.

21. Chung BJ, Batra PS, Citardi MJ, Lanza DC. Endoscopic septoplasty:

Revisitation of the technique, indications, and outcomes. Am J

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

59/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Rhinol. 2007;21(3):307-311.

22. Dadgarnia M, Meybodian M, Karbasi A, et al. Comparing nasal

packing with trans-septal suturing following septoplasty: A

randomized clinical trial. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol.

2017;274(9):3513-3518.

23. Dinis PB, Haider H. Septoplasty: Long-term evaluation of results.

Am J Otolaryngol. 2002;23(2):85-90.

24. Dong W, Han R, Fan F. Diced cartilage techniques in rhinoplasty.

Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2022;46(3):1369-1377.

25. Doyle RL. Healthcare Management Guidelines. Vol. 1. 2nd

Printing. Seattle, WA: Milliman and Robertson; September 1997.

26. Dubin MR, Pletcher SD. Postoperative packing after septoplasty:

Is it necessary? Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2009;42(2):279-285,

viii-ix.

27. El-Fattah AM, Naguib A, El-Sisi H, et al. Midline nasofrontal

dermoids in children: A review of 29 cases managed at Mansoura

University Hospitals. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2016;83:88-

92.

28. Fettman N, Sanford T, Sindwani R. Surgical management of the

deviated septum: Techniques in septoplasty. Otolaryngol Clin

North Am. 2009;42(2):241-252.

29. Garzaro M, Dell'Era V, Brucoli M, et al. Endoscopic septoplasty as

a routine approach: Our experience on 647 patients. J

Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2019;47(10):1530-1534.

30. Getz AE, Hwang PH. Endoscopic septoplasty. Curr Opin

Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008;16(1):26-31.

31. Gioacchini FM, Alicandri-Ciufelli M, et al. The role of antibiotic

therapy and nasal packing in septoplasty. Eur Arch

Otorhinolaryngol. 2014;271(5):879-886.

32. Godley FA, Nemeroﬀ RF, Josephson JS. Current trends in

rhinoplasty and the nasal airway. Med Clin North Am.

1993;77(3):643-656.

33. Godoy S JM, Godoy JM, Godoy A, Revelo C. A straight choice:

Avoiding septal re-deviation using titanium plates. A 16 year

retrospective patient follow-up evaluation. Rhinology.

2017;55(4):369-375.

34. Grossman ZD, Katz DS, et al. Sinusitis. In: Cost-Eﬀective

Diagnostic Imaging; The Clinician's Guide. St. Louis, MO: Mosby;

1995:376-377.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

60/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

35. Gubisch W. Extracorporeal septoplasty for the markedly deviated

septum. Arch Facial Plast Surg. 2005;7(4):218-226.

36. Gurlek A, Fariz A, Aydogan H, et al. Eﬀects of diﬀerent

corticosteroids on edema and ecchymosis in open rhinoplasty.

Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2006;30(2):150-154.

37. Hajiioannou JK, Bizaki A, Fragiadakis G, et al. Optimal time for

nasal packing removal after septoplasty. A comparative study.

Rhinology. 2007;45(1):68-71.

38. Harb A, Abdul-Razzak A. Nonsurgical correction of surgical

rhinoplasty complications with hyaluronic acid ﬁllers: A

retrospective review of 2088 cases. Plast Reconstr Surg Glob

Open. 2024;12(9):e6126.

39. Harb A, Brewster CT. The nonsurgical rhinoplasty: A retrospective

review of 5000 treatments. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2020;145(3):661-

667.

40. Hartley BE, Eze N, Trozzi M, et al. Nasal dermoids in children: A

proposal for a new classiﬁcation based on 103 cases at Great

Ormond Street Hospital. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol.

2015;79(1):18-22.

41. Harvey RJ, Sheahan PO, Schlosser RJ. Surgical management of

benign sinonasal masses. Otolaryngol Clin North Am.

2009;42(2):353-375.

42. Hernandez Martinez VM, Garcia Benavides L, Totsuka Sutto SE, et

al. Eﬀectiveness of degradable and non-degradable implants to

close large septal perforations in an experimental model. J Plast

Surg Hand Surg. 2016;50(4):222-226.

43. Hollander JE. Assessment and management of facial lacerations.

UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed

November 2021.

44. Hong CJ, Monteiro E, Badhiwala J, et al. Open versus endoscopic

septoplasty techniques: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2016;30(6):436-442.

45. Huerter JV. Functional endoscopic sinus surgery and allergy.

Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 1992;25(1):231-238.

46. Jang YJ, Kwon M. Modiﬁed extracorporeal septoplasty technique

in rhinoplasty for severely deviated noses. Ann Otol Rhinol

Laryngol. 2010;119(5):331-335.

47. Kantas I, Balatsouras DG, Papadakis CE, et al. Aesthetic

reconstruction of a crooked nose via extracorporeal septoplasty.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

61/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008;37(2):154-159.

48. Karaman E, Alimoglu Y, Aygun G, et al. Eﬀect of septoplasty and

per-operative antibiotic prophylaxis on nasal ﬂora. B-ENT.

2012;8(1):13-19.

49. Kim DH, Lee HH, Kim SH, Hwang SH. Eﬀectiveness of using a

bioabsorbable implant (Latera) to treat nasal valve collapse in

patients with nasal obstruction: Systemic review and meta-

analysis. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2020;10(6):719-725.

50. Kim JS, Heo SJ. Questionable eﬀect of crosshatching incision in

septoplasty. Clin Exp Otorhinolaryngol. 2020;13(1):47-51.

51. Kim SJ, Kim HT, Park YH, et al. Coblation nasal septal swell body

reduction for treatment of nasal obstruction: A preliminary

report. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2016;273(9):2575-2578.

52. Kim YH, Kim BJ, Bang KH, et al. Septoplasty improves life quality

related to allergy in patients with septal deviation and allergic

rhinitis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2011;145(6):910-914.

53. Koutsourelakis I, Georgoulopoulos G, Perraki E, et al.

Randomised trial of nasal surgery for ﬁxed nasal obstruction in

obstructive sleep apnoea. Eur Respir J. 2008;31(1):110-117.

54. Lawrence R. Pediatric septoplasy: A review of the literature. Int J

Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2012;76(8):1078-1081.

55. Lee SB, Jang YJ. Treatment outcomes of extracorporeal

septoplasty compared with in situ septal correction in

rhinoplasty. JAMA Facial Plast Surg. 2014;16(5):328-334.

56. Lorente J, Jurado MJ, Romero O, et al. Eﬀects of functional

septoplasty in obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Med Clin

(Barc). 2005;125(8):290-292.

57. Lund VJ. Oﬃce evaluation of nasal obstruction. Otolaryngol Clin

of North Am. 1992;25(4):803-815.

58. Marshall, KG, Elhamy LA. Disorders of the nose and paranasal

sinuses. Littleton, MA: PSG Publishing Co, Inc.; 1987:103.

59. Matulic Z, Skitarelić N. Reconstruction of nasal tip in combined

technique of cartilage disc grafts and onlay graft. Lijec Vjesn.

2004;126(1-2):18-21.

60. Mayersak RJ. Initial evaluation and management of facial trauma

in adults. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate;

reviewed November 2021.

61. Mendez DR, Lapointe A. Nasal trauma and fractures in children

and adolescents. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA:

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

62/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

UpToDate; reviewed November 2021.

62. Meyerhoﬀ WL, Rice DH. Otolaryngology- Head and Neck Surgery.

Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders Co; 1992:474.

63. Moore M, Eccles R. Objective evidence for the eﬃcacy of surgical

management of the deviated septum as a treatment for chronic

nasal obstruction: A systematic review. Clin Otolaryngol.

2011;36(2):106-113.

64. Morgan NJ, MacGregor FB, Birchall MA, et al. Racial diﬀerences in

nasal fossa dimensions determined by acoustic rhinometry.

Rhinology. 1995;33(04)224-228.

65. Moses MA, Green BC, Cugno S, et al. The management of midline

frontonasal dermoids: A review of 55 cases at a tertiary referral

center and a protocol for treatment. Plast Reconstr Surg.

2015;135(1):187-196.

66. Most CP. Anterior septal reconstruction: Outcomes after a

modiﬁed extracorporeal septoplasty technique. Arch Facial Plast

Surg. 2006;8(3):202-207.

67. Nuara MJ, Mobley SR. Nasal valve suspension revisited.

Laryngoscope. 2007;117(12):2100-2106.

68. Paniello RC. Nasal valve suspension. An eﬀective treatment for

nasal valve collapse. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.

1996;122(12):1342-1346.

69. Pasquini E, Sciarretta V, Frank G, et al. Endoscopic treatment of

benign tumors of the nose and paranasal sinuses. Otolaryngol

Head Neck Surg. 2004;131(3):180-186.

70. Rhee JS, Arganbright JM, McMullin BT, Hannley M. Evidence

supporting functional rhinoplasty or nasal valve repair: A 25-year

systematic review. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008;139(1):10-

20.

71. Ricci G, D'Ascanio L. Antibiotics in septoplasty: Evidence or habit?

Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2012;26(3):194-196.

72. San Nicolo M, Stelter K, Sadick H, et al. A 2-year follow-up study

of an absorbable implant to treat nasal valve collapse. Facial

Plast Surg. 2018;34(5):545-550.

73. San Nicolo M, Stelter K, Sadick H, et al. Absorbable implant to

treat nasal valve collapse. Facial Plast Surg. 2017;33(2):233-240.

74. Schuller DE, Schleuning AJ. DeWeese and Saunders'

Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery. 8th ed. St. Louis, MO:

Mosby; 1994:93-107, 123-133, 135-145.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

63/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

75. Schwentner I, Dejakum K, Schmutzhard J, et al. Does nasal septal

surgery improve quality of life? Acta Otolaryngol.

2006;126(7):752-757.

76. Seyidova N, Chen AD, Kazei D, Lin SJ. Treating symptomatic

midvault soft tissue collapse in revision rhinoplasty with a nasal

wall implant. Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open. 2020;8(6):e2887.

77. Sidle DM, Stolovitzky P, O'Malley EM, et al. Bioabsorbable implant

for treatment of nasal valve collapse with or without concomitant

procedures. Facial Plast Surg. 2021;37(5):673-680.

78. Sidle DM, Stolovitzky P, Ow RA, et al. Twelve-month outcomes of

a bioabsorbable implant for in-oﬃce treatment of dynamic nasal

valve collapse. Laryngoscope. 2020;130(5):1132-1137.

79. Silva Merea V, Lee AH, Peron DL, et al. CPAS: Surgical approach

with combined sublabial bone resection and inferior turbinate

reduction without stents. Laryngoscope. 2015;125(6):1460-1464.

80. Simmen D, Sommer F, Briner HR, et al. The eﬀect of "Pyriform

Turbinoplasty" on nasal airﬂow using a virtual model. Rhinology.

2015;53(3):242-248.

81. Spielmann PM, White PS, Hussain SS. Surgical techniques for the

treatment of nasal valve collapse: A systematic review.

Laryngoscope. 2009;119(7):1281-1290.

82. Stolovitzky P, Senior B, Ow RA, et al. Assessment of

bioabsorbable implant treatment for nasal valve collapse

compared to a sham group: A randomized control trial. Int

Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2019;9(8):850-856.

83. Stolovitzky P, Sidle DM, Ow RA, et al. A prospective study for

treatment of nasal valve collapse due to lateral wall insuﬃciency:

Outcomes using a bioabsorbable implant. Laryngoscope.

2018;128(11):2483-2489.

84. Surowitz J, Lee MK, Most SP. Anterior septal reconstruction for

treatment of severe caudal septal deviation: Clinical severity and

outcomes. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015;153(1):27-33.

85. Taylor RJ, Sherris DA. Prosthetics for nasal perforations: A

systematic review and meta-analysis. Otolaryngol Head Neck

Surg. 2015;152(5):803-810.

86. Trimarchi M, Bellini C, Toma S, Bussi M. Back-and-forth

endoscopic septoplasty: Analysis of the technique and outcomes.

Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2012;2(1):40-44.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

64/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

87. van Egmond MMHT, Rovers MM, Hannink G, et al. Septoplasty

with or without concurrent turbinate surgery versus non-surgical

management for nasal obstruction in adults with a deviated

septum: A pragmatic, randomised controlled trial. Lancet.

2019;394(10195):314-321.

88. Varadharajan K, Sethukumar P, Anwar M, Patel K. Complications

associated with the use of autologous costal cartilage in

rhinoplasty: A systematic review. Aesthet Surg J. 2015;35(6):644-

652.

89. Vo R, Barhoush Y, Batchu L, et al. All-cause claims analysis of the

LATERA absorbable nasal implant vs surgical repair in patients

with nasal valve collapse. J Med Econ. 2024;27(1):1099-1107.

90. Voizard B, Theriault M, Lazizi S, Moubayed SP. North American

survey and systematic review on caudal septoplasty. J

Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2020;49(1):38.

91. Wang WW, Dong BC. Comparison on eﬀectiveness of trans-septal

suturing versus nasal packing after septoplasty: A systematic

review and meta-analysis. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol.

2017;274(11):3915-3925.

92. Wang, MB. Etiologies of nasal symptoms: An overview. UpToDate

[online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed October 2018;

November 2023; November, 2024.

93. Wee JH, Park MH, Oh S, Jin HR. Complications associated with

autologous rib cartilage use in rhinoplasty: A meta-analysis. JAMA

Facial Plast Surg. 2015;17(1):49-55.

94. Wiesmiller K, Keck T, Rettinger G, et al. Nasal air conditioning in

patients before and after septoplasty with bilateral turbinoplasty.

Laryngoscope. 2006;116(6):890-894.

95. Wilkins SG, Sheth AH, Kayastha D, et al. Adverse events

associated with bioabsorbable nasal implants: A MAUDE

database analysis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.

2023;168(5):1253-1257.

96. Williams LC, Kidwai SM, Mehta K, et al. Nonsurgical rhinoplasty: A

systematic review of technique, outcomes, and complications.

Plast Reconstr Surg. 2020;146(1):41-51.

97. Wood JW, Casiano RR. Inverted papillomas and benign

nonneoplastic lesions of the nasal cavity. Am J Rhinol Allergy.

2012;26(2):157-163.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

65/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

98. Wotman M, Kacker A. Should otolaryngologists pay more

attention to nasal swell bodies? Laryngoscope. 2015;125(8):1759-

1760.

99. Written by the doctors and editors at UpToDate. Patient

education: Deviated septum (The Basics). UpToDate [online

serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed November 8, 2021.

100. Written by the doctors and editors at UpToDate. Patient

education: Nose fracture (The Basics). UpToDate [online serial.

Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed November 8, 2021.

101. Wu C, Yang S, Zheng G, et al. A systematic review and meta-

analysis of the eﬃcacy and complication rates of augmentation

rhinoplasty with autologous cartilage and silicone prosthesis.

Ann Palliat Med. 2022;11(3):993-1000.

102. Zaoui K, Schneider MH, Neuner O, Federspil PA. Prosthetic

treatment of nasal septal perforations: Results with custom-

made silicone buttons. HNO. 2016;64(12):897-904.

103. Zapata S, Kearns DB. Nasal dermoids. Curr Opin Otolaryngol

Head Neck Surg. 2006;14(6):406-411.

104. Zhao QM, Gao J, Huang XX, et al. Concentrated growth factors

extracted from blood plasma used to repair nasal septal mucosal

defect after rhinoplasty. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2020;44(2):511-516.

Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist in administering plan benefits and

constitute neither offers of coverage nor medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only a partial, general description of plan or

program benefits and does not constitute a contract. Aetna does not provide health care services and, therefore, cannot guarantee any

results or outcomes. Participating providers are independent contractors in private practice and are neither employees nor agents of Aetna

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

66/67

10/25/25, 11:48 AM

Septoplasty and Rhinoplasty - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

or its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for medical advice and treatment of members. This Clinical Policy Bulletin may be

updated and therefore is subject to change.

Copyright © 2001-2025 Aetna Inc.

Language services can be provided by calling the number on your member ID card. For additional language assistance: Español Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Pусский ةيبرعلا Kreyòl Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch ⽇本語 یسراف Other

Languages…

(http://www.aetna.com/individuals-families/contact-aetna/information-in-other-languages.html)

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0005.html

67/67