10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

-->

(https://www.aetna.com/)

Vasectomy Procedures

Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins

Clinical Policy Bulletins

Number: 0027

Table Of Contents

Policy History

Policy

Applicable CPT / HCPCS / ICD-10 Codes

Last Review

Background

02/18/2025

References

Effective: 12/07/2004

Next Review: 01/08/2026

Review History

Deﬁnitions

Policy

Additional Information

Scope of Policy

Clinical Policy Bulletin

This Clinical Policy Bulletin addresses vasectomy procedures.

Notes

I. Medical Necessity

Aetna considers vasectomy reversal medically necessary for the

treatment of post-vasectomy pain syndrome if member has failed

non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory medications and local nerve

blocks/steroid injections.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

1/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

II. Experimental, Investigational, or Unproven

The following procedures are considered experimental,

investigational, or unproven because there is inadequate evidence

in the peer-reviewed published literature regarding their

eﬀectiveness (not an all-inclusive list):

A. Vasectomy Procedures

1. Endoscopic vasectomy

2. Implantable vas deferens ligation clip (Vasclip, VMBC, LLC,

Roseville, MN)

3. Pro-Vas occlusion method

4. Vasal injection (e.g., reversible inhibition of sperm under

guidance (RISUG)

5. Vasal occlusion (e.g., Intra Vas Plug, and LigaSure);

B. Procedures for Treatment of Post-Vasectomy Pain Syndrome

1. Epididymectomy

2. Micro-denervation of the spermatic cord.

CPT Codes / HCPCS Codes / ICD-10 Codes

CPT codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Code

Code Description

Implantable clip:(Vasclip, VMBC, LLC, Roseville, MN), Vessel Sealing Device (LigaSure) - no speciﬁc code:

Endoscopic vasectomy - no speciﬁc code:

ICD-10 codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB (not all-inclusive):

N50.811,

Testicular pain

N50.812,

N50.819

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

2/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Encounter for sterilization

Z30.2

Vasectomy status

Z98.52

Vasectomy reversal procedures:

CPT codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Epididymectomy; unilateral

54860

bilateral

54861

Vasovasostomy, vasovasorrhaphy

55400

Other CPT codes related to the CPB:

Cystourethroscopy with transurethral resection or incision of

52402

ejaculatory ducts

Vasectomy, unilateral or bilateral (separate procedure),

55250

including postoperative semen examination(s)

Semen analysis; motility and count (not including Huhner test)

89310

ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Other chronic postprocedural pain [post-vasectomy]

G89.28

Background

According to a guideline on sterilization by the American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG, 2003), approximately 500,000

vasectomies are performed annually in the United States by urologists,

general surgeons, and family physicians.

During vasectomy, an incision or puncture (no-scalpel technique) is made

in the scrotum and the vas deferens is then cut to disconnect it, thereby

interrupting the sperm's route from the testicles to the penis. A piece of

the vas is removed (to reduce the chances of the 2 ends of the vas

rejoining) and the 2 ends are then clipped, tied, or cauterized. Fascial

interposition, in which one end of the vas is covered by either the sheath

tissues of the vas itself or with adjacent connective tissue, is also widely

used in conjunction with occlusion techniques to reduce the risk of re-

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

3/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

canalization. A controversial and less widespread practice involves

leaving the testicular end of the vas unsealed to allow sperm to flow out

of the vas in order to minimize pressure on and damage to the epididymis

(Errey et al, 1986). Once the vasectomy is performed, the testicles still

generate sperm, but their movement is blocked.

The rate of vasectomy failure, defined as lack of azoospermia on follow-

up semen analysis (SA) or presence of pregnancy, has generally been

reported to be between 0 % to 2 % (Cook et al, 2004; ACOG, 2003).

The 3 main causes of vasectomy failure are operative failure, unprotected

intercourse before the semen is cleared of sperm, and spontaneous early

or late recanalization of the vas (Cook et al, 2004). Failure rates are

reportedly lower when traditional vasectomy is performed by more

experienced surgeons (Schwingl et al, 2000). Vasectomy is considered a

low-risk procedure with fewer than 3 % of cases resulting in

complications; complications include: infection, bleeding, hematoma,

acute and chronic pain and congestive epididymitis.

Since the late 1960s, attempts have been made to develop an alternative

method of vasectomy that would be more easily reversible than a

standard vasectomy. Most of these efforts focused on the use of

mechanical valves that could be opened and closed. The Vasclip, a

locking ligation clip the size of a grain of rice, was cleared for marketing

by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) based on a 510(k)

application. Thus, the manufacturer was not required to supply the

evidence of effectiveness that would be required to support a pre-market

approval application (PMA). The FDA 510(k) summary of substantial

equivalence stated the Vasclip is identical in use to the Hem-o-lok, a

polymer ligating clip that is used to close off vessels that supply blood to

organs.

An unpublished prospective clinical study available through VMBC, LLC,

the VASCLIP Company and on their website, reported the results of 124

men who had the Vasclip procedure. Three of the men (2.5 %) did not

become infertile due to improper placement of the Vasclip, 0.8 %

developed a hematoma and 0.8 % developed a sperm granuloma. Sixty-

eight of the patients who returned for a SA all tested as infertile (no live

sperm) at an average of 373 days after the Vasclip procedure and all of

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

4/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

the 78 patients who returned for a SA tested as infertile at an average of

853 days after. Reported range of significant pain was 5 %. Statistics on

reversal are not yet available.

The potential for enhancing reversal is one main rationale for the use of

vas occlusion with clips (Schwingl et al, 2000). In addition, the

manufacturer states that the Vasclip results in lower complication rates

than conventional male sterilization procedures. However, it is not known

whether the Vasclip compresses the vas so tightly that the blood supply

to the underlying portion of vas is permanently damaged. There is no

adequate evidence in the peer-reviewed published medical literature that

the Vasclip has a reduced late failure rate, lower complication rate or

improved reversal rate then traditional vasectomy.

There is inconsistent evidence regarding the effectiveness of the Vasclip

implant compared to standard vasectomy procedures. Kirby et al (2006)

examined if the Vasclip implant procedure would (i) be equivalent to

vasectomy in producing azoospermia, (ii) produce greater patient

satisfaction post-operatively, and (iii) result in lower complication

rates, post-operative pain, hematoma formation, spermatic

granuloma, and surgical site infection when compared with historical

controls. Successful sterilization, defined by azoospermia at 10 to 14

months, was observed in 116 of 119 subjects. The authors stated that

effectiveness seemed to be equivalent to that of vasectomy, although the

study did not include an internal control group of subjects receiving

vasectomy. The authors observed that the incidence of post-operative

pain and hematoma formation was similar to that which had been

reported for standard vasectomy. The Vasclip procedure also had similar

infection rates. The authors reported that the Vasclip procedure seemed

to have lower rates of sperm granuloma formation compared to standard

vasectomy. In 3 subjects with persistent presence of sperm, histological

examination after traditional vasectomy indicated that misalignment of the

device led to partial vas incision with recanalization. The authors reported

that 99 % of survey respondents would recommend that other men

considering a vasectomy have the Vasclip procedure.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

5/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

On the other hand, Levine et al (2006) found persistent motile sperm after

the Vasclip procedure. The authors assessed the effectiveness and

mechanism of failure in a small case series of Vasclip vasectomies.

Microscopic semen analysis was done a minimum of 4 weeks post-

operatively and after at least 15 ejaculations. The number of sperm and

motility were quantified in 15 or more high power fields. Successful

vasectomy was defined as 2 consecutive post-operative unspun semen

analyses containing no sperm. Patients with failed vasectomy underwent

bilateral surgical removal of the vas deferens segments containing the

ligation band for gross and histological analysis. Six of 8 patients (75 %)

were deemed azoospermic after 2 semen analyses at a mean follow-up

of 7 and 11 weeks post-operatively, respectively. Two of 8 patients (25

%) had semen analyses containing multiple motile sperm after

vasectomy. In the 2 failed cases 1 side was patent, as demonstrated by

vasal cannulation and irrigation with dilute methylene blue despite a well-

positioned, intact and secure ligation band. Histological analysis showed

extravasation and sperm granuloma on the patent side. The authors

concluded that the Vasclip was found to fail at an unexpectedly high rate.

Pathological analysis suggests sperm extravasation and fistula tract

formation as the mechanism. One failure resulted in an unwanted

pregnancy, which demonstrates the need for patient counseling regarding

post-operative follow-up.

Cook et al (2004) systematically reviewed the evidence comparing male

sterilization techniques. They identified 2 controlled clinical trials (Gupta

et al, 1997 [n = 110]; Clausen et al, 1983 [n = 79]) comparing vas

occlusion with clips (no transection of the vas) versus a conventional

vasectomy technique (transaction of the vas with both ends of the vas

ligated and looped back). Neither trial found a significant difference

between the 2 groups with regard to the primary outcome of failure to

reach azoospermia. However, Cook et al (2004) stated that no firm

conclusions can be made about the comparative effectiveness, safety,

and acceptability of these vas occlusion techniques due to the poor

quality of the studies.

In a Cochrane review on vasectomy occlusion techniques for male

sterilization that include excision and ligation, thermal or electrocautery,

mechanical/chemical occlusion, as well as vasectomy with vas irrigation

or with fascial inter-position (Cook et al, 2007), the authors concluded that

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

6/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

for vas occlusion with clips or vasectomy with vas irrigation, no

conclusions can be made as those studies were of low quality and under-

powered. Fascial inter-position reduced vasectomy failure. An intra-vas

device was less effective in reducing sperm count than was no-scalpel

vasectomy. They noted that randomized controlled studies evaluating

other vasectomy techniques were not available; more and better quality

research is needed to examine vasectomy techniques.

The Pro-Vas occlusion technique utilizes a titanium spring ligation clip

that stops the flow of sperm without the need to cut or burn the sperm

ducts. Pro-Vas has also been reported to result in less post-procedure

pain and quicker return to normal activities compared with traditional

vasectomy. Additionally, there were no complications following Pro-Vas

occlusions, however, it is acknowledged the number of patients is not

sufficient to provide statistically significant results. According to Dr.

Swartz, the Pro-Vas occlusion technique has the potential to simplify and

standardize the vasectomy technique. It may provide less experienced

vasectomy surgeons a means for achieving clinical results similar to

those of experienced surgeons. The Pro-Vas technique also spares

sacrificing the vasal artery. Dr. Swartz added that there should be a lower

re-canalization rate with the Pro-Vas method because the spring ligation

clip cannot dislodge or ever lose its constant low-pressure occlusion

force. Additionally, the clip is designed not to apply so much pressure

that may result in necrosis – a situation that sometimes occurs with other

types of ligatures. Should the patient ever change his mind with regard to

his vasectomy, reversal of the Pro-Vas procedure should be much easier

as the clip is very easy to identify and dissection to find the two occluded

ends of the vas will be much simpler. Patient acceptance may be higher

with the Pro-Vas occlusion technique than traditional vasectomy because

overall quality of the outcomes may be improved. However, these

hypotheses need to be confirmed by additional clinical studies.

Michielsen and Beerthuizen (2010) performed a systematic

Medline/PubMed and Cochrane Library review of the literature with

regard to technique, effectiveness, safety and complications of male

sterilization. Vasectomy is an outpatient procedure which can be

performed under local anesthesia. The vas deferens is accessed by

means of either a conventional incision with a scalpel or by using the "no-

scalpel technique". A closed-ended vasectomy (by means of suture

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

7/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

ligature, surgical clips or electro-cautery) or the open-ended alternative is

then carried out. Each of these techniques has both advantages and

drawbacks. Fascial interposition has been shown to reduce the risk of

failure. A promising alternative for occluding the vas consists of placing

an intra-vas device. Hematoma and pain are the most common

complications. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, narcotic analgesics

and neuroleptic drugs are effective for treatment of pain. The success of

vasectomy reversal ranges from 30 to 60 %. The data on record

convincingly demonstrate that vasectomy is a safe and cost-effective

intervention for permanent male contraception. The no-scalpel

vasectomy under local anesthesia is recommended. Occlusion of the vas

is most successful when performed by means of an electrocautery;

fascial interposition should complete the procedure.

The American Urological Association’s guideline on "Vasectomy" (Sharlip

et al, 2012) provided guidance to clinicians who offer vasectomy

services. This guideline was peer-reviewed by 55 independent experts

during the guideline development process. The guideline stated that vas

isolation should be performed using a minimally-invasive vasectomy

technique such as the no-scalpel vasectomy technique. Vas occlusion

should be performed by any 1 of 4 techniques that are associated with

occlusive failure rates consistently below 1 %. These are mucosal

cautery of both ends of the divided vas without ligation or clips

(1) with or (2) without fascial interposition; (3) open testicular end of

the divided vas with mucosal cautery of abdominal end with fascial

interposition and without ligation or clips; and (4) non-divisional

extended electrocautery. Patients may stop using other methods of

contraception when 1 un-centrifuged fresh semen specimen shows

azoospermia or less than or equal to 100,000 non-motile sperm/ml. The

authors concluded that vasectomy should be considered for permanent

contraception much more frequently than is the current practice in the

U.S. and many other nations.

The European Association of Urology’s guidelines on "Male infertility"

(Jungwirth et al, 2013) stated that fascial interposition and cauterization

appears to be the most effective vasectomy technique. Furthermore,

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

8/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

methods of male contraception other than vasectomy are associated with

high failure rates or are still experimental (e.g., hormonal approach).

In a Cochrane review, Cook et al (2014) compared the effectiveness,

safety, acceptability and costs of vasectomy techniques for male

sterilization. In February 2014, these investigators updated the searches

of CENTRAL, MEDLINE, POPLINE and LILACS. They looked for recent

clinical trials in ClinicalTrials.gov and the International Clinical Trials

Registry Platform. Previous searches also included EMBASE. For the

initial review, the authors searched the reference lists of relevant articles

and book chapters. They included randomized controlled trials (RCTs)

comparing vasectomy techniques, which could include suture ligature,

surgical clips, thermal or electrocautery, chemical occlusion, vas plugs,

vas excision, open-ended vas, fascial interposition, or vas irrigation.

These researchers assessed all titles and abstracts located in the

literature searches; 2 reviewers independently extracted data from

articles identified for inclusion. Outcome measures include contraceptive

efficacy, safety, discontinuation, and acceptability. Peto odds ratios (OR)

with 95 % confidence intervals (CI) were used for dichotomous outcomes,

such as azoospermia. The mean difference (MD) was used for the

continuous variable of operating time. A total of 6 studies met the

inclusion criteria; 1 trial compared vas occlusion with clips versus a

conventional vasectomy technique. No difference was found in failure to

reach azoospermia (no sperm detected). Three trials examined

vasectomy with vas irrigation; 2 studies looked at irrigation with water

versus no irrigation, while 1 examined irrigation with water versus the

spermicide euflavine. None found a difference between the groups for

time to azoospermia. However, 1 trial reported that the median number

of ejaculations to azoospermia was lower in the euflavine group

compared to the water irrigation group. One high-quality trial compared

vasectomy with fascial interposition versus vasectomy without fascial

interposition. The fascial interposition group was less likely to have

vasectomy failure. Fascial interposition had more surgical difficulties, but

the groups were similar in side effects. Lastly, 1 trial found that an intra-

vas was less likely to produce azoospermia than was no-scalpel

vasectomy. More men were satisfied with the intra-vas device, however.

The authors concluded that for vas occlusion with clips or vasectomy with

vas irrigation, no conclusions can be made as those studies were of low

quality and under-powered. Fascial interposition reduced vasectomy

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

9/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

failure. An intra-vas device was less effective in reducing sperm count

than was no-scalpel vasectomy. Moreover, they stated that RCTs

examining other vasectomy techniques were not available. More and

better quality research is needed to examine vasectomy techniques.

Tan and Levine (2016) stated that post-vasectomy pain syndrome (PVPS)

remains one of the more challenging urological problems to manage.

This can be a frustrating process for both the patient and clinician as

there is no well-recognized diagnostic regimen or reliable effective

treatment. The authors noted that while excision of sperm granuloma,

micro-denervation of the spermatic cord (MDSC), epididymectomy,

vasectomy reversal or orchiectomy has been used in refractory cases of

PVPS, the success rates of these procedures remain unclear due to the

availability of only small case series of men undergoing surgical treatment

for this condition.

Smith and colleagues (2016) noted that variations in vasectomy

techniques have failed to define a means of preventing PVPS. In

addition, studies examining the pathophysiology of this condition have

failed to elucidate a reproducible cause. Prevailing assumptions are

focused upon epididymal congestion and obstruction. Potentially, up-

and-coming techniques such as vasal occlusive gels, currently under

development, offer novel alternatives to traditional vasectomy. Such an

intra-vasal approach could involve the percutaneous puncture of the

vasal lumen and instillation of a reversible, semi-permeable polymer gel.

This intra-vasal option could theoretically decrease the negative side

effects that result from direct scrotal manipulation. However, if the

assumption of epididymal congestion holds true, it would stand to reason

that any mechanism that retards the flow of sperm from the epididymis

has the potential to result in post-vasectomy pain. Thus, potentially the

best correction for post-vasectomy pain rests with the generation of a

hypothetical male oral conceptive. Such a medication, by avoiding the

need to have an occlusive process for vasectomy, could eliminate post-

vasectomy pain and its related sequelae.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

10/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Vasal Injection and Vasal Occlusion

Kanakis and Goulis (2015) stated that despite the variety of available

female contraceptive methods, many pregnancies are still undesired.

Many men want to participate equally with their partner in family planning;

however, male contraceptive methods (MCMs) account for only 14 % of

those used worldwide and no pharmaceutical MCM is available so far.

The only 2 MCMs currently available are condoms, which despite

protecting against sexually transmitted diseases have high failure rates,

and vasectomy, which though very efficient (99 %) is poorly reversible.

Among MCMs under investigation, male hormonal contraceptives (MHCs)

are those that have come closest to commercialization. The action of

MHCs relies on the disruption of spermatogenesis that exogenous

androgen administration evokes by suppressing the hypophyseal-gonadal

axis. Various regimens of androgens as monotherapy or in combination

with progestins have been tested in clinical trials achieving a Pearl Index

that is equal to that of the female oral contraceptive pill; however,

concerns regarding the variable response rates observed (non-

responders: 5 to 20 %), the impracticality of parenteral administration and

long-term prostate-associated or cardiovascular morbidity have deflected

the interest of the pharmaceutical industry from further research. Non-

hormonal contraception methods may be, at least theoretically, more

specific by selectively disrupting spermatogenesis and sperm transport or

fertilizing ability. The authors noted that only a few have been tested in

clinical trials (Intra Vas Plugs ,and reversible inhibition of sperm under

guidance [RISUG]); most of them are still in pre-clinical development or

have been abandoned due to toxicity (gossypol).

Ansari and colleagues (2016) stated that among the vas-based methods

on trial, RISUG, a co-polymer of styrene and maleic anhydride is being

projected as an effective alternative to no scalpel vasectomy (NSV).

Reversible inhibition of sperm under guidance offers long-term

contraception with safety, effectiveness in human trials and can be

delivered by no-scalpel injection. Currently, the procedure is under

phase-III clinical trial. However, reversal of this vas-based drug-induced

contraception needs to be established in animal models prior to clinical

trials to ensure its claim as an effective alternative for vasectomy. In the

present investigation, the relative suitability of dimethyl sulphoxide

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

11/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

(DMSO) and sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3) for RISUG induced long-

term vas occlusion reversal was carried out in albino rats. Animals were

allocated into 4 groups:

(i) sham-operated control (group-I), (ii) vas occlusion with RISUG for

360 days (group-II), (iii) vas occlusion with RISUG for 360 days and

reversal with DMSO (group-III) and (iv) vas occlusion with RISUG for

360 days and reversal with NaHCO3 (group-IV); n = 10 for each group.

A variable response in fertility was observed in different groups. Absolute

sterility in group III at all mating intervals, while, 0 % fertility in groups II

and IV following 90 days of occlusion was observed. Following reversal

restoration of fertility with DMSO at 45 days, whereas, reversal by

NaHCO3 at 30 days was noticed. Ejaculated spermatozoa of RISUG

injected and initial intervals of reversed animals exhibited various degrees

of abnormalities. The testes exhibited focal degeneration in vas-occluded

animals. The occluded lumen of the vas deferens contained an

eosinated polymer with exfoliated epithelium. Following vas occlusion

reversal, a complete regeneration in the vas epithelium was seen. All

other parameters remained unaltered. The authors concluded that the

reversal with NaHCO3 resulted in an early resumption of fertility when

compared with DMSO and the procedure was found to be successful,

feasible and safe up to F1 generation. They state that RISUG provides a

hope for reversible male contraceptives.

Ansari and associates (2017) evaluated reversal of short- and long-term

vas occlusion with RISUG using DMSO and NaHCO3 in male rabbits;

animals were divided into 7 groups (n= 5 for each group). Fortnightly,

semen analysis revealed that sperm concentration and output steadily

declined after vas occlusion and complete azoospermia was attained at

30 to 60 days post-injection. Spermatozoa re-appeared at 60 to 75 days

of reversal and normal zoospermia was noticed between 135 days and

150 days in the reversal groups. All spermatozoa were found non-motile

before azoospermia and a gradual recovery in sperm motility was

observed between 105 days and 135 days of reversal. A significant

decline in viability of sperms was noticed during vas occlusion up to 30 to

60 days, which recovered at 60 to 75 days post-reversal and normalized

by 75 to 105 days in the reversal groups. A significant enhancement in

the sperm abnormalities was recorded in all vas-occluded animals as well

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

12/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

as those in initial periods of reversal. Other parameters, namely, semen

volume, ejaculation time, pH, color, and consistency, remained unaltered

during all phases of the study. Fertility test, at the intervals of 15 days,

demonstrated that animals exhibited complete sterility during the entire

period of vas occlusion. A gradual recovery in fertility was observed with

the appearance of spermatozoa following vas occlusion reversal and 100

% fertility was observed following 135 to 150 days of reversal; F1 progeny

of reversed animals was found normal. The authors concluded that these

findings suggested that reversal with DMSO or NaHCO3 is feasible, with

normal progeny, following short- and long-term contraception.

An UpToDate review on "Vasectomy and other vasal occlusion

techniques for male contraception" (Viera, 2016) states that "Vasal

occlusion with a plug (e.g., "Shug" or medical grade silicone rubber),

requires microsurgery for implantation and later removal. Either a

conventional open or no-scalpel technique may be used to isolate the vas

deferens for the implantation of these devices. Surgical vasal occlusion

procedures claim to produce reversible azoospermia without affecting

spermatogenesis, but there are no human data on success rates. Vasal

injection – Percutaneous methods can be used for injecting chemicals

directly into the vas deferens to effect temporary (polymer) or permanent

(sclerosing agents) occlusion. One technique intended for permanent

sterilization involves first injecting 2 dyes into the vas, using a different

color for the left and right vas. Then, a sclerosing agent is then injected

into the vas lumen distal to the previously injected dye. Successful

occlusion is determined by having the patient void to see which, if any,

dye is excreted in the urine. The chemicals required for this procedure

are not available for use in the US. Another technique, reversible

inhibition of sperm under guidance (RISUG) involves injection the non-

sclerotic polymer, styrene maleic anhydride (SMA). It is claimed to offer

long-term contraception without adverse side effects. The purported

advantages of this method are that it provides long-term contraception

without the side effects associated with male hormonal contraception,

and in contrast to the other techniques listed above, is reversible without

surgery. Clinical trials are ongoing".

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

13/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Endoscopic Vasectomy

Schlager and colleagues (2017) noted that surgical vasectomy remains

the gold standard for fertility control in men. Endoluminal occlusion of the

seminal ducts, thus avoiding an external incision, may become an

appealing alternative to this approach. These researchers had shown

that non-traumatic endoscopic inspection of the seminal ducts is feasible

in the human cadaver. They examined the feasibility and reliability of

occlusion using several commercially available medical sealing agents in

the porcine vas deferens (VD). Tests were conducted using 25 porcine

spermatic ducts (10 cm in length) ex-vivo. The explanted specimens

were fixed and cannulated using the Seldinger technique. These

investigators administered 5 different occluding agents:

(i) n-butyle-2-cyanoacrylate, (ii) n-butyle-2-cyanoacrylate in

combination with a platinum vascular coil, (iii) Tissucol Duo S, (iv)

Gelita Spon, and (v) AFP Plug endoluminally. Tightness was evaluated

after 5, 15, 60, 360, 720, and 1,440 minutes for each of the 5 grades,

respectively, using a solution of methylene blue and saline injected under

controlled pressure of 300 mm Hg followed by histological examination.

All agents were administered into the porcine seminal ducts (4 out of 5

via a ureteric catheter). Gelita Spon and Tissucol Duo S did not occlude

the lumen sufficiently, whereas n-butyle-2-cyanoacrylate, n-butyle-2-

cyanoacrylate in combination with coil, Tissucol Duo and AFP Plug

performed satisfactorily. In particular, cyanoacrylate combined with a coil

was able to close the seminal duct tightly and for a long time. Histological

findings confirmed this sealant's gapless adhesion. AFP Plug application

revealed similarly good results. However, its form needs to be optimized

to ensure its suitability for endoscopic use. The authors concluded that

various developments regarding minimally invasive fertility control

methods have been underway for decades. Further miniaturization of

endoscopy and novel materials may pave the way for endoscopic fertility

control in males in the future. These researchers demonstrated the

potential of commercially available medical sealing agents to reliably

occlude the porcine VD.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on "Vasectomy" (Viera, 2017) does not

mention endoscopic vasectomy as a vasectomy option.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

14/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Vessel Sealing Device (e.g., LigaSure) for Vasectomy

Guzelburc and associates (2019) stated that vasectomy is a popular and

effective male surgical contraceptive method. Different techniques have

been proposed to reduce failure rates and complications. In this study,

these researchers compared vas deferens occlusion rates using both

standard occlusion techniques and LigaSure (LSVS) for vasectomy. A

total of 9 patients underwent open radical retropubic prostatectomy at the

authors’ institution. During the procedure, a total of 125 fresh vas

deferens samples were obtained and divided into 4 groups as follows:

Group 1: ligation (n = 22), Group 2; ligation and electro-cauterization (n =

18), Group 3; 5 mm LSVS (n = 44), and Group 4; 10 mm LSVS (n = 41).

All specimens were harvested during surgery and subsequent

histopathological assessments were performed to assess the luminal

status of the vas deferens. Histopathological evaluation revealed that the

majority of vas lumens with LSVS (79.5 % of Group 3 and 89.4 % of

Group 4) were totally occluded. With standard techniques, however, the

majority of vas lumens (86.4 % and 77.8 % of Groups 1 and 2,

respectively) maintained a tiny patency. The authors concluded that on

histopathological review, the application of LSVS resulted in better

occlusion rates, compared to standard ligation methods. Moreover, they

stated that these findings suggested a higher occlusive role for LSVS for

vasectomy; further clinical studies are needed to confirm the safety and

efficacy of this technique.

Micro-Denervation of the Spermatic Cord for Post-Vasectomy Pain

Syndrome

In a retrospective study, Tan and colleagues (2018) evaluated the

outcomes of patients who underwent MDSC for PVPS. All patients who

underwent MDSC for PVPS by a single surgeon between March 2002

and October 2016 were included in this study. Pain was documented

using the numerical rating scale (NRS); spermatic cord block (SCB) was

performed on all patients, and success was defined as NRS score of less

than or equal to 1 for more than 4 hours. All patients had failed medical

therapy prior to MDSC; and all previous procedures for PVPS had been

performed elsewhere. Surgical success was defined as a post-operative

NRS score of less than or equal to 1. A total of 27 patients with 28 scrotal

units underwent MDSC for PVPS. The median (first quartile; third

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

15/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

quartile) follow-up was 10 (2; 16.5) months. The median (range) duration

of pain prior to surgery was 57 (8 to 468) months. Pain was bilateral in

14 (52 %), left-sided in 8 (30 %) and right-sided in 5 patients (19 %).

Data on SCB were available for 23 patients, with a success rate of 96 %.

The median (range) pre-operative pain NRS score was 7 (2 to 10). The

median (range) pain score after SCB on the NRS scale was 0 (0 to 5).

The median (range) post-operative pain score on the NRS was 0 (0 to 9).

Overall success was achieved in 20 of 28 testicular units (71 %).

Patients with involvement of multiple structures in the scrotum (i.e., testis,

epididymis, spermatic cord) had a success rate of 81 % and were more

likely to have a successful surgery (p < 0.001); 5 patients had failed a

prior epididymectomy and 3 had failed a vaso-vasostomy for PVPS; this

had no correlation with the success of MDSC (p = 0.89). The authors

concluded that MDSC was a reasonably successful, durable and valuable

approach for PVPS, especially when pain involves multiple structures in

the scrotum (testis, epididymis, spermatic cord). They stated that MDSC

was equally effective in patients who had previously failed a procedure for

PVPS. No patient had a worsening NRS score after MDSC. This was

the largest study to-date evaluating MDSC for the treatment of PVPS.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on "Vasectomy" (Viera, 2018) does not

mention micro-denervation of the spermatic cord as a therapeutic option

for post-vasectomy pain syndrome.

Opioids for Post-Vasectomy Pain Control

Barham and colleagues (2019) noted that the American Urological

Association (AUA) Position Statement on opioid use recommends using

opioids only when necessary. These investigators examined if routine

prescribing of opioids is necessary for pain control following vasectomy,

and if an association exists with persistent use. They retrospectively

reviewed the charts of patients who underwent vasectomy in clinic

between April 2017 and March 2018. Patients were stratified into 2

groups, including those initially prescribed opioids and those not receiving

opioid prescriptions at the time of vasectomy. The initial pain medication

regimen depended on the standard prescription practice of each

provider. Encounters with a medical provider for scrotal pain within 30

days, subsequent opioid prescriptions and new persistent opioid

prescriptions between 90 and 180 days were compared between the 2

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

16/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

groups using the Fisher exact test. Between April 2017 and March 2018,

a total of 228 patients underwent clinic vasectomy as performed by 8

urologists. At the time of vasectomy 102 patients received opioid

prescriptions and 126 received no opioid prescriptions. There was no

statistically significant difference between the opioid and non-opioid

groups in encounters for scrotal pain (12.7 % versus 18.4 %, p = 0.279).

The incidence of new persistent opioid use was 7.8 % in the opioid cohort

compared to 1.5 % in the nonopioid cohort (p = 0.046). The authors

concluded that opioids, which did not appear to be necessary in men who

undergo vasectomy, were associated with persistent use in 7.8 % of

patients at 3 to 6 months. These researchers stated that in the face of an

opioid epidemic urologists should limit over prescription of opioids

following vasectomy.

In a retrospective, cohort study, Welk and associates (2020) examined if

filling a post-operative opioid prescription following low acuity urologic

surgery is associated with new persistent opioid use. This trial was

conducted using linked administrative data from Ontario, Canada.

Participants were adults who underwent their first vasectomy,

transurethral prostatectomy, urethrotomy, circumcision,

spermatocelectomy, or hydrocelectomy between 2013 and 2016. These

researchers excluded men with prior opioid use, confounding concurrent

procedures, prolonged hospitalization, or cancer. They determined

whether the patient filled a prescription for an opioid within 5 days of their

surgery. The primary outcome was evidence of at least 2 opioid

prescriptions filled 9 to 15 months following urologic surgery. The

secondary outcome was admission for opioid over-dose. Primary

analysis was adjusted logistic regression analysis. These investigators

identified 91,083 men, most of whom underwent vasectomy (78 %). A

total of 32,174 (35 %) men filled a prescription for an opioid after their

procedure. The most common opioid prescribed was codeine (70 %),

and urologists were the primary prescribers (81 %). Men who filled a

post-procedure opioid prescription did not differ, for most of the 57

medical co-morbidities or markers of healthcare utilization that we

measured, from those who did not fill an opioid prescription. There was

long-term opioid use in 1,447 (1.6 %); men who had filled a post-

operative opioid prescription had a significantly higher risk of long-term

opioid use (OR 1.4, 95 % CI: 1.3 to 1.6) and opioid over-dose (OR 3.0, 95

% CI: 1.5 to 5.9). The authors concluded that prescription of opioids

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

17/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

following low acuity urology procedures was significantly associated with

increased opioid use at 1 year after surgery. These researchers stated

that efforts should be made to reduce post-operative opioids, especially

for urologic procedures that do not typically require opioids. Moreover,

they noted that a limitation of this study was that they could not determine

the indication for long-term opioid prescriptions.

Vasectomy Reversal for Post-Vasectomy Pain Syndrome

Myers et al (1997) noted that the post-vasectomy pain syndrome (PVPS)

is a rare but troublesome complication of vasectomy. These investigators

reported their experience with 32 patients who underwent vasectomy

reversal (VR) for relief of the PVPS. The records of 32 patients

undergoing vasovasostomy (VV) or epididymovasostomy (EV) for the

PVPV were evaluated for characteristics of symptoms, previous therapy,

interval from vasectomy, success of surgery and duration of relief. Of 32

men who underwent VR for the PVPS between 1980 and 1994, 24 (75 %)

had relief of symptoms following the initial procedure. Of the 8 men with

recurrent pain, 6 underwent a 2nd VR procedure, and 3 of them

subsequently had relief of symptoms. Overall, 84.4 % (27 of 32) had

resolution of pain. The authors concluded that in their experience, VR

had a high rate of success for relief of the PVPS. It did not preclude other

forms of surgical therapy and it should be considered in the treatment of

the PVPS.

Nangia et al (2000) stated that the cause of the PVPS is unclear. Some

postulated etiologies include epididymal congestion, tender sperm

granuloma and/or nerve entrapment at the vasectomy site. To the

authors’ knowledge, nerve proliferation has not been evaluated previously

as a cause of pain. VR is reportedly successful for relieving pain in some

patients. These investigators reported their experience and correlated

histological findings in resected vasal segments with outcome to explain

the mechanism of pain in these patients. These researchers

retrospectively reviewed the records of 13 men who underwent VR for the

PVPS. They compared blinded histological evaluations of the vasal ends

excised at VR in these patients with those of pain-free controls who

underwent VR to reestablish fertility. Controls were matched to patients

for the interval since vasectomy. Histological features were graded

according to the degree of severity of vasitis nodosum, chronic

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

18/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

inflammation and nerve proliferation. Mean time to pain onset after

vasectomy was 2 years. Presenting symptoms included testicular pain in

9 cases, epididymal pain in 2, pain at ejaculation in 4 and pain during

intercourse in 8. Physical examination demonstrated tender

epididymides in 6 men, full epididymides in 6, a tender vasectomy site in

4 and a palpable nodule in 4. No patient had testicular tenderness on

palpation. Unilateral and bilateral VV was carried out in 3 and 10 of the

13 patients, respectively. Post-operatively 9 of the 13 men (69 %)

became completely pain-free. Mean follow-up was 1.5 years. These

investigators observed no differences in vasectomy site histological

features in patients with PVPS and matched controls, and no difference in

histological findings in patients with PVPS who did and did not become

pain-free post-operatively. The authors concluded that no histological

features aided in identifying a cause of pain or provided prognostic value

for subsequent pain relief; and VR appeared to be beneficial for relieving

pain in the majority of select patients with PVPS.

Huang et al (2002) carried out a retrospective review of patients who

received VR from 1989 to 1998 at Chang Gung Memorial Hospital

(CGMH) in Linkou, Taiwan. The patency rate and partner pregnancy

rates were also analyzed. A total of 70 patients underwent a VV at

CGMH from 1989 to 1998. Post-operative semen analysis and

achievement of pregnancy in a partner were examined. Various pre-

operative factors were also examined and analyzed. Patients ranged

from 30 to 58 (average of 40.8 +/- 6.5) years of age. The most common

reason for requesting a VV was divorce (42.3 %). The patency rate was

85.7 % (36/42), and the pregnancy rate was 40.6 % (13/32). However, if

patients receiving a VV for reasons other than to achieve pregnancy (i.e.,

pain, erectile dysfunction [ED], or infertility of the wife) were excluded, the

pregnancy rate reached 50.0 % (13/26); 3 patients received a 2nd VV;

patency was noted in 2, and pregnancy was achieved in the partner of 1.

Of the 5 patients receiving a VV due to PVPS, 3 felt that their condition

had improved. The authors concluded that the patency and pregnancy

rates of VVs in CGMH were 85.7 % and 50.0 %, respectively. Repeat

surgery could be considered an effective means of restoring fertility if an

initial VV failed. Moreover, a VV appeared to be an effective means of

treating PVPS.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

19/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Horovitz et al (2012) stated that PVPS is a rare but serious and

debilitating complication of vasectomy. For men with PVPS, VR is a

surgical option after medical management has failed; however, there is a

paucity of data in the literature defining its therapeutic efficacy. These

researchers examined the role and effect of vasectomy reversal in the

treatment of men with PVPS. Three urologists in Toronto, Ontario carried

out 149 publicly funded VRs between January 2000 and September

2010. The electronic health records were reviewed and 23 of the 149 (15

%) procedures were performed for PVPS. Of these men who underwent

14 VVs, 13 completed a telephone conducted questionnaire (response

rate 56 %). Patient demographics, pre-operative and post-operative pain

scores, and quality of life (QOL) were retrospectively evaluated.

Orchialgia occurred at a mean ± SD of 19 ± 42.5 months following

vasectomy and subjects (mean age of 43.8 ± 5.2 years) experienced pain

for 50.3 ± 34.9 months before VV. After VV, improvement of pain

occurred in 93 % (13 of 14) and 50 % were rendered pain-free with an

average improvement in pain intensity scores of 65 % (p < 0.005). Of the

men 15 % (2 of 13) had a recurrence of pain to baseline; however, 79 %

(11 of 14) had a durable positive response. QOL was significantly

improved after VV (p < 0.005) and 93 % (13 of 14) of the patients said

they would undergo the same operation again. The authors concluded

that VV was an effective treatment for the treatment of PVPS, and it could

achieve robust and durable long-term improvement in pain intensity and

QOL.

In a retrospective study, Lee et al (2012) examined outcomes (according

to patency) of VR in qualified patients with PVPS. A total of 32 patients

with PVPS undergoing VR between January 2000 and May 2010 were

examined. Of these, 68.8 % (22/32) completed a study questionnaire,

either onsite at the out-patient clinic or via telephone interview. Pre-

operative clinical findings, pre-operative and post-operative visual analog

scale (VAS) pain scores, patency and pregnancy rate and overall patient

satisfaction were analyzed. For the latter, a 4-point rating of cure,

improvement, no change or recurrence was used. The mean age was

45.09 ± 4.42 years; and the mean period of follow-up was 3.22 years

(0.74 to 7.41). Patency rates were 68.2 % (15/22) and pregnancy rates

were 36.4 % (8/22). The mean VAS was 6.64 ± 1.00 pre-operatively and

1.14 ± 0.71 post-operatively (p < 0.001). The difference in the mean pre-

operative and post-operative VAS was 6.00 ± 1.25 (4 to 8) in the patency

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

20/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

group and 4.43 ± 0.98 (3 to 6) in the no patency group (p = 0.011). A

significant difference in procedural satisfaction with surgical outcome was

observed between patency and no patency groups (p = 0.014). The

authors concluded that in PVPS patients requiring VR, a significant

difference was observed between the patency and no patency groups in

terms of pain reduction and the degree of patient procedural satisfaction.

In a retrospective study, Lee et al (2014) compared the outcome of

epididymectomy and VR in patients with PVPS who required surgical

treatment. A total of 50 patients with PVPS who underwent

epididymectomy or VR between January 2000 and January 2010 were

included. Of these, 36 (72.0 %) patients completed the study

questionnaire. These 36 patients completed the questionnaire either

during attendance at the out-patient clinic or during a telephone interview;

20 patients (22 cases) underwent epididymectomy, and 16 patients (17

cases) underwent VR. Analyses were carried out for pre-operative

clinical findings, pre-operative and post-operative VAS pain scores,

patency and pregnancy rate in VR group, and patient satisfaction with

surgical treatment. The mean age was 48.28 ± 11.27 years, and the

mean period of follow-up was 3.58 years (0.15 to 10.03). The mean VAS

pain score was 6.78 ± 0.93 pre-operatively and 1.13 ± 0.72 post-

operatively (p < 0.001). The difference in the mean pre-operative and

post-operative VAS pain scores was 6.00 ± 1.34 (3 to 8) in the

epididymectomy group and 5.50 ± 1.03 (4 to 8) in the VR group.

However, this difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.227). No

significant difference in satisfaction with surgical outcome was observed

between the epididymectomy and the VR groups (p = 0.124). The

authors concluded that in PVPS patients requiring surgical treatment, no

significant difference was observed between the epididymectomy and VR

groups in either the reduction in pain or the degree of patient satisfaction

with surgical outcome. Selection of the optimal surgical procedure may

be dependent on specific patient characteristics.

Polackwich et al (2015) reviewed their institution's experience and

success with VR for the treatment of PVPS over the last 20 years. A

single surgeon carried out all the VRs. These investigators identified 123

procedures performed for PVPS treatment and were able to contact 76

patients. They sent surveys or conducted phone interviews inquiring

about satisfaction, levels of pain pre-operatively and post-operatively, and

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

21/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

the need for additional procedures for pain. A total of 31 (40.8 %)

patients completed phone or written surveys. Furthermore, these

researchers compared the location of vasectomy among patients

presenting for pain to that of fertile patients. Thirty-one men had VR for

post-vasectomy pain, with median age of 38 years (range of 31 to 55

years), of which 26 underwent VV; 7 patients required EV on at least 1

side based on intra-operative findings; 82 % of patients reported

improvement in their pain at 3.2 months (± 3.4 months) after VR; 34 %

patients had complete resolution of all pain. Mean pain score before

procedure was 6.4 (± 2.4), decreasing to a median of 2.7 (± 2.7)

afterward. There was a 59 % improvement in pain scores (p < 0.001); 2

patients needed additional procedures for continued pain, 1 orchiectomy

and 1 epididymectomy; 4 patients required an additional VR, 1 repeat VV

at 1 year and 3 EVs at 1, 5, and 9 years, respectively. Follow-up ranged

from 1 to 19 years, with a mean follow-up of 8.4 years. These

investigators found no relationship between vasectomy location and

pain. The authors concluded that VR, via the use of both VV and EV,

could provide long-term relief from PVPS.

Smith-Harrison et al (2017) noted that PVPS is a rare, but devastating

outcome following vasectomy. Given the widespread use of vasectomy

for permanent contraception, with more than 500,000 procedures

performed annually in the U.S., it can be a significant challenge for both

patients and providers. VR is a surgical option for men with PVPS who

fail conservative or medical management. Despite improvements in

technique, vasectomy carries some inherent risks making pre-procedure

counseling regarding the risks of PVPS paramount. Chronic post-

operative pain, or PVPS, occurs in 1 % to 2 % of men undergoing the

procedure. These researchers examined the use of VR as a means of

addressing PVPS. These researchers stated that men with post-

vasectomy pain should be evaluated to rule out other sources of

discomfort. Conservative therapy with or without medical management is

the appropriate initial treatment for most. How long to continue

conservative treatment before proceeding to surgery is unclear. There

are currently no guidelines or standardized protocols for which patients

should proceed to surgical intervention. In the U.S., VR generally

remains an out-of-pocket expense and can carry significant financial

burden which may delay or prevent its use entirely. Following failure of

more conservative therapies for PVPS, however, VR remains a

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

22/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

reasonable therapeutic option. In the end, choice of surgery should be

made after engaging in an in-depth discussion and using a patient-

centered approach. Better studies are needed to characterize the

incidence of PVPS according to standardized measures beginning shortly

after the procedure and continued for long-term follow-up. In a similar

fashion, larger studies equipped to evaluate the incidence of chronic pain

and its varying severities and those patients reporting impaired QOL,

seeking medical help and receiving surgical procedures need to be better

captured. Without better data, improvements in the diagnosis and

treatment of PVPS will remain elusive.

Auyeung et al (2020) stated that chronic pain following vasectomy is very

challenging to diagnose and treat. Being a diagnosis of exclusion, it

exposes the patient to a series of investigations and treatment regimens

over months. Once a diagnosis is made, the treatment starts with non-

invasive behavioral or pharmacotherapies. If these treatments fail,

patients might require invasive surgical interventions, such as repeating

the vasectomy with wide excision of the severed ends, micro-denervation

of the spermatic cord, epididymectomy, VR or orchiectomy. The last

resort for patients with debilitating chronic pain is orchiectomy, despite

one study by Sweeney et al [2008] stating that 80 % of patients who

underwent orchiectomy continued to experience pain”.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Vasectomy” (Viera, 2022) states

that “Post-vasectomy pain syndrome is distinct from post procedure pain;

however, there is some controversy regarding its definition and therefore

prevalence. Historically, rates for post-vasectomy pain syndrome have

been reported as very low (< 1 %). However, surveys have found that the

incidence of "troublesome" post-vasectomy pain is reported by

approximately 15 % of men, with pain severe enough to impact quality of

life in 2 %; survey respondents, however, may not have been

representative of all post-vasectomy men. The cause of most post-

vasectomy pain syndromes is chronic congestive epididymitis. Testicular

fluid and sperm production remain constant following vasectomy. The

majority of this fluid accumulates in the epididymis, which then swells.

While asymptomatic in most men, some will develop a chronic dull ache

in the testes, which is made worse by ejaculation. Other causes or

contributors to pain syndromes include the formation of sperm granuloma

or nerve entrapment at the vasectomy site. First-line therapy for post-

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

23/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

vasectomy pain is the administration of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory

medications and warm baths. If unsuccessful, local nerve blocks or

steroid injections may be performed by a pain specialist. If the post-

vasectomy patient's discomfort is localized to a tender, palpable

granuloma, this may be excised, followed by fulguration of the leaking

end of the vas. Refractory cases may require surgery, including either

vasectomy reversal (vasovasostomy) or complete epididymectomy.

Vasovasostomy successfully relieves pain in up to 70 to 82 % of well-

selected patients. These patients, however, will almost always require

the use of another form of contraception as a result”.

Vasectomy and Risk of Prostate Cancer

Xu et al (2021) noted that the debate over the association between

vasectomy and prostate cancer (PCa) has lasted about 40 years and

there is no sign of stopping. In a meta-analysis, these investigators

examined if vasectomy is associated with PCa based on the most

comprehensive and up-to-date evidence available. PubMed, Cochrane

Library, and Embase databases were searched from inception to March

14, 2021 without year or language restriction. Multi-variable adjusted risk

ratios (RRs) were used to assess each endpoint. Risk of bias was

assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa scale. A total of 58 studies

involving 16,989,237 subjects met inclusion criteria. There was

significant association of vasectomy with risk of any PCa (RR, 1.18, 95 %

CI: 1.07 to 1.31). Association between vasectomy and advanced PCa

(RR, 1.06, 95 % CI: 1.01 to 1.12), low-grade PCa (RR, 1.06, 95 % CI:

1.02 to 1.10), and intermediate-grade PCa (RR, 1.12, 95 % CI: 1.03 to

1.22) were significant. There was no significant association between

vasectomy and PCa-specific mortality (RR, 1.01, 95 % CI: 0.93 to 1.10).

The authors concluded that this study found that vasectomy was

associated with the risk of any PCa and advanced PCa. From the current

evidence, patients should be fully informed of the risk of PCa before

vasectomy.

The authors stated that this study had several drawbacks. First, some

included studies did not report baseline, such as age vasectomy, follow-

up duration. The subgroup results might have been different if all

individuals were reported. Second, some case-control studies and cross-

sectional studies were of poor quality (e.g., used unclear ascertainment of

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

24/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

exposure). Third, this meta-analysis was based on observational studies

because RCTs concerning this topic were neither available nor likely to be

conducted in the future. Fourth, publication bias between included

studies could not be completely eliminated. Subgroup analyses and

sensitivity analyses have been carried out to reduce the heterogeneity.

Fifth, follow-up duration and age at vasectomy, it was difficult to obtain

complete data, which may be confounding factors of the association

between vasectomy and PCa.

Baboudjian et al (2022) stated that previous reports have demonstrated

an association between vasectomy and PCa. However, there exist

significant discrepancies between studies and systematic reviews due to

a lack of strong causal association and residual confounding factors such

as prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening. On behalf of the Prostate

Cancer Committee of the Association Française d'Urologie (CC-AFU),

these researchers examined the association between vasectomy and

PCa, in both unadjusted and PSA screen-adjusted studies. They carried

out a systematic review according to the Preferred Reporting Items for

Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) statement. PubMed,

Scopus, and Web of Science databases were searched in January 2022

for studies that examined the association between vasectomy and PCa.

A total of 37 studies including 16,931,805 patients met inclusion criteria.

A pooled analysis from all studies showed a significant association

between vasectomy and any-grade PCa (OR 1.23; 95 % CI: 1.10 to 1.37;

p < 0.001; I2 = 96 %), localized PCa (OR 1.08; 95 % CI: 1.06 to 1.11; p <

0.00001; I2 = 31 %), or advanced PCa (OR 1.07; 95 % CI: 1.02 to 1.13; p

= 0.006; I2 = 0 %). The association with PCa remained significant when

the analyses were restricted to studies with a low risk of bias (OR 1.06;

95 % CI: 1.02 to 1.10; p = 0.02; I2 = 48 %) or cohort studies (OR 1.09; 95

% CI: 1.04 to 1.13; p < 0.0001; I2 = 64 %). Among studies adjusted for

PSA screening, the association with localized PCa (OR 1.06; 95 % CI:

1.03 to 1.09; p < 0.001; I2 = 0 %) remained significant. Conversely,

vasectomy was no longer associated with localized high-grade (p = 0.19),

advanced (p = 0.22), and lethal (p = 0.42) PCa. The authors concluded

that this meta-analysis found a significant association between

vasectomy and the risk of any, mainly localized, PCa. However, the effect

estimates for the association between vasectomy and PCa were

increasingly close to null when examining studies of robust design and

quality. When these investigators limited the analysis to studies adjusted

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

25/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

for PSA screening, the association remained significant only for localized

disease, but not for aggressive and/or advanced PCa. These

researchers stated that future studies are needed to prospectively

evaluate the possible causality between vasectomy and PCa, with

attention to potential residual confounders that were not taken into

account in large cohort studies.

The authors stated that the findings of this study need to be interpreted

with caution. Translating these findings into clinical practice is likely to

dissuade patients from undergoing vasectomy, whereas the absolute risk

may be close to zero. Clear, fair, and understandable information should

be provided regarding a possible association between vasectomy and

PCa, without being able to examine if there is any causality. To

definitively address this question, future collaborative, well-designed,

international studies are needed to prospectively assess this risk of PCa

among vasectomized patients with particular attention to potential

confounders such as well-established risk factors for developing PCa.

Robotic-Assisted Microsurgical Vasovasostomy for Reversal of

Vasectomy

Seth et al (2024) noted that vasovasostomy is a cost-effective procedure

for the reversal of vasectomy. A water-tight adequately blood-supplied

mucosal anastomosis is needed for better outcomes. In a systematic

review and meta-analysis, these investigators compared the outcome of

vasovasostomy carried out by 3 different techniques: macroscopic, pure

microsurgical, and robotic-assisted microsurgical techniques. Scopus,

Web of Science, PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane library databases

were searched for relevant studies from January 1901 to June 2023.

These researchers performed quantitative syntheses using the inverse

variance method in OpenMeta software. This review involved 95 studies

of different designs, with a total sample size of 48,132. The majority of

operations were carried out bilaterally, and subjects were monitored for

up to 10 years. The pooled patency rate was the highest following

robotic-assisted vasovasostomy (94.4 %), followed by pure microsurgical

vasovasostomy (87.5 %), and macroscopic vasovasostomy (83.7 %).

The pooled pregnancy rate following purely microsurgical vasovasostomy

was higher than that of macroscopic vasovasostomy (47.4 % versus 43.7

%). Definitive pregnancy rates in robotic-assisted vasovasostomy are yet

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

26/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

to be determined. The authors concluded that patency outcomes for

vasovasostomy were best with robotic-assisted microsurgical technique,

followed by pure microsurgical technique, and conventional macroscopic

technique. Moreover, these researchers stated that further investigations

of robotic-assisted microsurgical vasovasostomy outcomes and RCTs are

needed to support this evidence.

References

The above policy is based on the following references:

1. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG).

Beneﬁts and risks of sterilization. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 46.

Washington, DC: ACOG; September 2003.

2. Ansari AS, Badar A, Balasubramanian K, Lohiya NK.

Contraception with RISUG® and functional reversal through

DMSO and NaHCO3 in male rabbits. Asian J Androl.

2017;19(4):389-395.

3. Ansari AS, Hussain M, Khan SR, Lohiya NK. Relative suitability of

DMSO and NaHCO3 for reversal of RISUG® induced long-term

contraception. Andrology. 2016;4(2):306-313.

4. Auyeung AB, Almejally A, Alsaggar F, Doyle F. Incidence of post-

vasectomy pain: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J

Environ Res Public Health. 2020;17(5):1788.

5. Baboudjian M, Rajwa P, Barret E, et al; Prostate Cancer

Committee of the Association Française d'Urologie CC-AFU.

Vasectomy and risk of prostate cancer: A systematic review and

meta-analysis. Eur Urol Open Sci. 2022;41:35-44.

6. Barham DW, McMann LP, Musser JE, et al. Routine prescription of

opioids for post-vasectomy pain control associated with

persistent use. J Urol. 2019;202(4):806-810.

7. Belker AM. Vasectomy and its reversal. Prim Care.

1985;12(4):703-717.

8. Brueschke EE, Zaneveld LJ, Rodzen R, et al. Development of

reversible vas deferens occlusive device: V. Flexible prosthetic

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

27/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

devices. Fertil Steril. 1975;26(1):40-52.

9. Clausen S, Lindenberg S, Nielsen ML, et al. A randomized trial of

vas occlusion versus vasectomy for male contraception. Scand J

Urol Nephrol. 1983;17(1):45-46.

10. Cook LA, Van Vliet H, Lopez LM, et al. Vasectomy occlusion

techniques for male sterilization. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.

2007;(2):CD003991.

11. Cook LA, Van Vliet HA, Lopez LM, et al. Vasectomy occlusion

techniques for male sterilization. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.

2014;3:CD003991.

12. Cook LA, Van Vliet HA, Pun A, Gallo MF. Vasectomy techniques for

male sterilization: Systematic Cochrane review of randomized

controlled trials and controlled clinical trials. Hum Reprod.

2004;19(11):2431-2438.

13. Errey BB, Edwards IS. Open-ended vasectomy: An assessment.

Fertil Steril. 1986;45(6):843-846.

14. Goldstein M. Surgical management of male infertility and other

scrotal disorders. In: Campbell's Urology. 8th ed. Ch. 44. PC

Walsh, AB Retnik, ED Vaughan, AJ Wein, eds. Philadelphia, PA: WB

Saunders Co; 2002:1541-1547.

15. Gupta AS, Kothari LK, Devpura TP. Vas occlusion by tantalum

clips and its comparison with conventional vasectomy in man:

Reliability, reversibility, and complications. Fertil Steril.

1977;28(10):1086-1089.

16. Guzelburc V, Baran C, Yaﬁ FA, et al. Vasectomy with vessel sealing

device: Comparison of diﬀerent diameters. Int J Impot Res.

2019;31(1):20-24.

17. Horovitz D, Tjong V, Domes T, et al. Vasectomy reversal provides

long-term pain relief for men with the post-vasectomy pain

syndrome. J Urol. 2012;187(2):613-617.

18. Huang HC, Hsieh ML, Huang ST, et al. Microsurgical vasectomy

reversal: ten-years' experience in a single institute. Chang Gung

Med J. 2002;25(7):453-457.

19. Jungwirth A, Diemer T, Dohle GR, et al. Guidelines on male

infertility. Arnhem, The Netherlands: European Association of

Urology (EAU); March 2013.

20. Kanakis GA, Goulis DG. Male contraception: A clinically-oriented

review. Hormones (Athens). 2015;14(4):598-614.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

28/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

21. Kirby D, Utz WJ, Parks PJ. An implantable ligation device that

achieves male sterilization without cutting the vas deferens.

Urology. 2006;67(4):807-811.

22. Labrecque M, Dufresne C, Barone MA, et al. Vasectomy surgical

techniques: A systematic review. BMC Medicine. 2004; 2:21.

23. Lee JY, Chang JS, Lee SH, et al. Eﬃcacy of vasectomy reversal

according to patency for the surgical treatment of

postvasectomy pain syndrome. Int J Impot Res. 2012;24(5):202-

205.

24. Lee JY, Cho KS, Lee SH, et al. A comparison of epididymectomy

with vasectomy reversal for the surgical treatment of

postvasectomy pain syndrome. Int Urol Nephrol. 2014;46(3):531-

537.

25. Levine LA, Abern MR, Lux MM. Persistent motile sperm after

ligation band vasectomy. J Urol. 2006;176(5):2146-2148.

26. Michielsen D, Beerthuizen R. State-of-the art of non-hormonal

methods of contraception: VI. Male sterilization. Eur J Contracept

Reprod Health Care. 2010;15(2):136-149.

27. Myers SA, Mershon CE, Fuchs EF. Vasectomy reversal for

treatment of the post-vasectomy pain syndrome. J Urol.

1997;157(2):518-520.

28. Nangia AK, Myles JL, Thomas AJ JR. Vasectomy reversal for the

post-vasectomy pain syndrome: A clinical and histological

evaluation. J Urol. 2000;164(6):1939-1942.

29. Nazerali H, Thapa S, Hays M, et al. Vasectomy eﬀectiveness in

Nepal: A retrospective study. Contraception. 2003;67(5):397-401.

30. Polackwich AS, Tadros NN, Ostrowski KA, et al. Vasectomy

reversal for postvasectomy pain syndrome: A study and

literature review. Urology. 2015;86(2):269-272.

31. Schlager D, Maas M, Hein S, et al. Is endoscopic vasectomy just a

dream?: An ex vivo study on feasibility and reliability of

endoluminal occlusion of porcine vas deferens. Urol Int.

2017;99(4):467-475.

32. Schwingl PJ, Guess HA. Safety and eﬀectiveness of vasectomy.

Fertil Steril. 2000;73(5):923-936.

33. Scovell JM, Mata DA, Ramasamy R, et al. Association between the

presence of sperm in the vasal ﬂuid during vasectomy reversal

and postoperative patency: A systematic review and meta-

analysis. Urology. 2015;85(4):809-813.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

29/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

34. Seth I, Gibson D, Bulloch G, et al. Vasovasostomy: A systematic

review and meta-analysis comparing macroscopic, microsurgical,

and robot-assisted microsurgical techniques. Andrology.

2024;12(4):740-767.

35. Sharlip ID, Belker AM, Honig S, et al; American Urological

Association. Vasectomy: AUA guideline. J Urol. 2012;188(6

Suppl):2482-2491.

36. Smith RP, Lipshultz LI, Kova JR. Vasectomy reversal and other

strategies to mitigate postvasectomy pain syndrome. Asian J

Androl. 2016;18(3):338.

37. Smith-Harrison LI, Smith RP. Vasectomy reversal for post-

vasectomy pain syndrome. Transl Androl Urol. 2017;6(Suppl

1):S10-S13.

38. Sokal DC, Labrecque M. Eﬀectiveness of vasectomy techniques.

Urol Clin North Am. 2009;36(3):317-329.

39. Sokal DC. Vasectomy techniques -- need for better occlusion

methods. Asian J Androl. 2010;12(3):442-443.

40. Tan WP, Levine LA. An overview of the management of post-

vasectomy pain syndrome. Asian J Androl. 2016;18(3):332-337.

41. Tan WP, Tsambarlis PN, Levine LA. Microdenervation of the

spermatic cord for post-vasectomy pain syndrome. BJU Int.

2018;121(4):667-673.

42. U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). VasClip. 510(k)

Summary. K021745. VBMC, LLC, White Bear Lake, MN. Rockville,

MD: FDA; August 20, 2002.

43. VBMC, LLC. Vasclip clinical study results. VMBC, LLC, The VASCLIP

Company. Roseville, MN: VBMC; 2004. Available

at: http://www.vasclip.com/Webpage.asp?MID=818885. Accessed

October 22, 2004.

44. Viera A. Vasectomy and other vasal occlusion techniques for

male contraception. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA:

UpToDate; reviewed September 2016.

45. Viera AJ. Vasectomy. UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA:

UpToDate; reviewed September 2017; August 2018; February

2022.

46. Welk B, McClure JA, Clarke C, et al. An opioid prescription for men

undergoing minor urologic surgery is associated with an

increased risk of new persistent opioid use. Eur

Urol. 2020;77(1):68-75.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

30/31

10/25/25, 12:13 PM

Vasectomy Procedures - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

47. Xu Y, Li L, Yang W, et al. Association between vasectomy and risk

of prostate cancer: A meta-analysis. Prostate Cancer Prostatic

Dis. 2021;24(4):962-975.

Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist in administering plan benefits and

constitute neither offers of coverage nor medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only a partial, general description of plan or

program benefits and does not constitute a contract. Aetna does not provide health care services and, therefore, cannot guarantee any

results or outcomes. Participating providers are independent contractors in private practice and are neither employees nor agents of Aetna

or its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for medical advice and treatment of members. This Clinical Policy Bulletin may be

updated and therefore is subject to change.

Copyright © 2001-2025 Aetna Inc.

Language services can be provided by calling the number on your member ID card. For additional language assistance: Español Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Pусский ةيبرعلا Kreyòl Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch ⽇本語 یسراف Other

Languages…

(http://www.aetna.com/individuals-families/contact-aetna/information-in-other-languages.html)

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/1_99/0027.html

31/31