10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

-->

(https://www.aetna.com/)

Viscosupplementation

Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins

Clinical Policy Bulletins

Number: 0179

Policy History

Table Of Contents

Last Review

Policy

04/09/2025

Applicable CPT / HCPCS / ICD-10 Codes

Effective: 11/05/1997

Background

Next Review: 01/22/2026

References

Review History

Deﬁnitions

Brand Selection for Medically Necessary Indications for Commercial Medical Plans

Additional Information

As defined in Aetna commercial policies, health care services are not

Clinical Policy Bulletin

medically necessary when they are more costly than alternative services

Notes

that are at least as likely to produce equivalent therapeutic or diagnostic

results. Durolane, Euflexxa, Gel-One, Gelsyn-3, GenVisc 850, Hyalgan,

Hymovis, Supartz FX, Synojoynt, Synvisc, Triluron, Trivisc, and Visco-3

viscosupplement products are more costly to Aetna than other

viscosupplement products for medically necessary indications. There is a

lack of reliable evidence that Durolane, Euflexxa, Gel-One, Gelsyn-3,

GenVisc 850, Hyalgan, Hymovis, Supartz FX, Synojoynt, Synvisc,

Triluron, Trivisc, and Visco-3 are superior to the lower cost

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

1/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

viscosupplement products: Monovisc, Orthovisc, and Synvisc One.

Therefore, Aetna considers Durolane, Euflexxa, Gel-One, Gelsyn-3,

GenVisc 850, Hyalgan, Hymovis, Supartz FX, Synojoynt, Synvisc,

Triluron, Trivisc, and Visco-3 to be medically necessary only for members

who have a contraindication or intolerance to the available equivalent

alternative viscosupplement products: Monovisc, Orthovisc, and Synvisc

One.

Policy

Scope of Policy

This Clinical Policy Bulletin addresses

viscosupplement (hyaluronate)

for commercial medical plans, and ancillary services. For

products

Medicare criteria for viscosupplementation, see

Medicare Part B Criteria

(https://www.aetna.com/health-care-professionals/medicare/part-b-

.

step.html)

Note: Requires Precertification:

Precertification of viscosupplementation products are required of all Aetna

participating providers and members in applicable plan designs. For

precertification of viscosupplementation products, call (866) 752-7021 or

fax (888) 267-3277. For Statement of Medical Necessity (SMN)

precertification forms, see

Specialty Pharmacy Precertiﬁcation

(https://www.aetna.com/health-care-professionals/health-care-

.

professional-forms.html)

I. Criteria for Initial Approval

Aetna considers viscosupplementation (hyaluronates) medically

necessary for the treatment of osteoarthritis (OA) in the knee

when all of the following criteria are met:

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

2/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

A. The diagnosis is supported by radiographic evidence of

osteoarthritis of the knee (e.g., as joint space narrowing,

subchondral sclerosis, osteophytes and sub-chondral cysts) or

the member has at least 5 of the following signs and

symptoms:

1. Bony enlargement

2. Bony tenderness

3. Crepitus (noisy, grating sound) on active motion

4. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) less than 40 mm/hr

5. Less than 30 minutes of morning stiﬀness

6. No palpable warmth of synovium

7. Over 50 years of age

8. Rheumatoid factor less than 1:40 titer (agglutination

method)

9. Synovial ﬂuid signs (clear ﬂuid of normal viscosity and WBC

3

less than 2000/mm ); and

B. The member has knee pain which interferes with functional

activities (e.g., ambulation, prolonged standing); and

C. The member has experienced an inadequate response or

adverse eﬀects with non-pharmacologic treatment options

(e.g., physical therapy, regular exercise, insoles, knee bracing,

weight reduction); and

D. The member has experienced an inadequate response or

intolerance or has a contraindication to a trial of an analgesic

(e.g., acetaminophen up to 3 to 4 grams per day, non-steroidal

anti-inﬂammatory drugs [NSAIDs], topical capsaicin cream) for

at least 3 months; and

E. The member has experienced an inadequate response or

intolerance or has a contraindication to a trial of intraarticular

steroid injections for at least 3 months; and

F. The member is not scheduled to undergo a total knee

replacement within 6 months of starting treatment.

Aetna considers all other indications as experimental,

investigational, or unproven.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

3/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

II. Continuation of Therapy

Aetna considers continuation of viscosupplement therapy

medically necessary for treatment of osteoarthritis in knee when

all of the following criteria are met:

A. Member meets all initial medical necessity criteria; and

B. Member has experienced improvement in pain and functional

capacity following the previous injections; and

C. At least 6 months has elapsed since the last injection in the

prior completed series of injections.

For the use of extended-release triamcinolone acetonide injectable

suspension (Zilretta) in the treatment of knee osteoarthritis, see

CPB

0673 - Osteoarthritis of the Knee: Selected Treatments

.

(../600_699/0673.html)

Dosage and Administration

Below includes a brief overview of the FDA-approved dosing

recommendations for treatment of osteoarthritis (OA) in the knee. For

additional dosing and administration information for any of the products

listed below, refer to the medication's FDA-approved Prescribing

Information.

Table: Viscosupplementation Dosing

Drug

Dose

Durolane (hyaluronic

3 mL one time injection

acid)

Euflexxa (1% sodium

20 mg once a week (1 week apart) for a total of 3

hyaluronate)

injections

Gel-One (Cross-linked

30 mg (3 mL) one time injection

Hyaluronate)

Gelsyn-3 (0.84%

16.8 mg once a week (1 week apart) for a total of 3

sodium hyaluronate)

injections

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

4/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

GenVisc 850 (sodium

25 mg once a week (1 week apart) for a total of 5

hyaluronate)

injections

Hyalgan (sodium

20 mg (2 mL) once a week (1 week apart) for a total of

hyaluronate)

5 injections

Hymovis (high

Supplied in a 5 mL syringe containing a 3 mL dose of

molecular weight

Hymovis to be injected once a week (1 week apart) for

hyaluronan)

a total of 2 injections

Monovisc (high

88 mg (4 mL) one time injection

molecular weight

hyaluronan)

Orthovisc (high

30 mg once a week (1 week apart) for a total of 3 to 4

molecular weight

injections

hyaluronan)

Supartz FX (sodium

25 mg / 2.5 mL prefilled syringe once a week (1 week

hyaluronate)

apart) for a total of 5 injections

Synojoynt (sodium

20 mg (2 mL) once a week for three weeks for at total

hyaluronate)

of 3 injections

Synvisc (Hylan G-F 20) 16 mg (2 mL) once a week (1 week apart) for a total of

3 injections

Synvisc One (Hylan G-

48 mg (10 mL); administered as a single intra-

F 20)

articular injection

Triluron (sodium

20 mg (2 mL) once a week for three weeks for a total

hyaluronate)

of 3 injections

TriVisc (sodium

2.5 mL intra-articular injection once a week for 3 weeks

hyaluronate)

(1 week apart) for a total of 3 injections

Visco-3 (sodium

2.5 mL intra-articular injection once a week for 3 weeks

hyaluronate)

(1 week apart) for a total of 3 injections

Sources: Prescribing information

Experimental, Investigational, or Unproven

I. Aetna considers the following as experimental, investigational, or

unproven because the eﬀectiveness of these approaches has not

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

5/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

been established in improving health outcomes:

A. Intra-articular polynucleotides in the treatment of knee

osteoarthritis

B. Ultrasound guidance, ﬂuoroscopic guidance and knee

arthrography for viscosupplement injections

C. Viscosupplementation in combination with anesthetics,

corticosteroids, mannitol/sorbitol, mesenchymal stem cells, or

platelet rich plasma because the eﬀectiveness of these

combinations has not been established. Note: Administration

of local anesthetic to anesthetize the injection site for

viscosupplementation is considered medically necessary.

D. Amobarbital / hyaluronic acid hydrogel for post-traumatic

osteoarthritis (OA) prevention

E. Intra-articular injection of an hexadecylamide derivative of

hyaluronic acid for the treatment of femoro-acetabular

impingement

F. Viscoelastic hydrogel Hymovis MO.RE for the treatment of knee

OA

II. Aetna considers viscosupplementation experimental,

investigational, or unproven for the following indications (not an

all-inclusive list) because the eﬀectiveness of

viscosupplementation for these indications has not been

established:

Chondromalacia patellae

Facet joint arthropathy

Following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction

Following arthroscopic knee surgery/partial meniscectomy

For use in joints other than the knee (e.g., ankle, carpo-

metacarpal joint, elbow, hip, metatarso-phalangeal joint,

shoulder, thumb, and temporomandibular joint)

Hemophilic arthropathy

Meniscectomy

Muscle stiﬀness

Osteochondritis dissecans

Palendromic rheumatism

Partial or total knee arthroplasty

Patellofemoral arthritis

Patellofemoral syndrome (patellar knee pain)

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

6/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Peripheral nerve pain

Plantar nerve entrapment syndrome

Psoriatic arthritis

Spastic hemiparesis

Treatment of ﬁrst metatarsophalangeal osteoarthritis (hallux

rigidus).

CPT Codes / HCPCS Codes / ICD10 Codes

CPT codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Code

Code Description

Combined ozone gas and viscosupplementation - No speciﬁc code:

Arthrocentesis, aspiration and/or injection, major joint or bursa

20610

(eg, shoulder, hip, knee, subacromial bursa); without ultrasound

guidance

CPT codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Injection(s), platelet rich plasma, any site, including image

0232T

guidance, harvesting and preparation when performed

Arthrocentesis, aspiration and/or injection, small joint or bursa

20600

(eg, fingers, toes); without ultrasound guidance

with ultrasound guidance, with permanent recording and

20604

reporting

Arthrocentesis, aspiration and/or injection, intermediate joint or

20605

bursa (eg, temporomandibular, acromioclavicular, wrist, elbow

or ankle, olecranon bursa); without ultrasound guidance

with ultrasound guidance, with permanent recording and

20606

reporting

Arthrocentesis, aspiration and/or injection, major joint or bursa

20611

(eg, shoulder, hip, knee, subacromial bursa); with ultrasound

guidance

Injection procedure for contrast knee arthrography or contrast

27369

enhanced CT/MRI knee arthrography

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

7/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Radiologic examination, knee, arthrography, radiological

73580

supervision and interpretation

Ultrasonic guidance for needle placement(eg, biopsy,

76942

aspiration, injection, localization device), imaging supervision

and interpretation.[not covered for viscosupplementation

injection]

Ultrasonic guidance, intraoperative

76998

Fluoroscopic guidance for needle placement (eg, biopsy,

77002

aspiration, injection, localization device) (List separately in

addition to code for primary procedure)

Fluoroscopic guidance and localization of needle or catheter tip

77003

for spine or paraspinous diagnostic or therapeutic injection

procedures (epidural or subarachnoid) (List separately in

addition to code for primary procedure)

Duplex scan of extremity veins including responses to

93970

compression and other maneuvers; complete bilateral study

Other CPT codes related to the CPB:

Arthroplasty, knee, hinge prosthesis

27445

Arthroplasty, knee, condyle and plateau; medial OR lateral

27446

compartment

medial AND lateral compartments with or without patella

27447

resurfacing

Arthroscopy, knee, surgical; osteochondral autograft(s) (eg,

29866

mosaicplasty) (includes harvesting of the autograft

osteochondral allograft (eg, mosaicplasty)

29867

meniscal transplantation (includes arthrotomy for meniscal

29868

insertion), medial or lateral

Arthroscopy, knee, diagnostic, with or without synovial biopsy

29870

(separate procedure)

for infection, lavage and drainage

29871

with lateral release

29873

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

8/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

for removal of loose body or foreign body (eg,

29874

osteochondritis dissecans fragmentation, chondral

fragmentation)

synovectomy, limited (eg, plica or shelf resection) (separate

29875

procedure)

synovectomy, major, 2 or more compartments (eg, medial or

29876

lateral)

debridement/shaving of articular cartilage (chondroplasty)

29877

abrasion arthroplasty (includes chondroplasty where

29879

necessary) or multiple drilling or microfracture

with meniscectomy (medial AND lateral, including any

29880

meniscal shaving) including debridement/shaving of articular

cartilage (chondroplasty), same or separate compartment(s),

when performed

with meniscectomy (medial OR lateral, including any

29881

meniscal shaving) including debridement/shaving of articular

cartilage (chondroplasty), same or separate compartment(s),

when performed

with meniscus repair (medial AND lateral)

29883

with lysis of adhesions, with or without manipulation

29884

(separate procedure)

drilling for osteochondritis dissecans with bone grafting, with

29885

or without internal fixation (including debridement of base of

lesion)

drilling for intact osteochondritis dissecans lesion

29886

drilling for intact osteochondritis dissecans lesion with

29887

internal fixation

Arthroscopically aided anterior cruciate ligament

29888

repair/augmentation or reconstruction

HCPCS codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Generic sodium hyaluronate 1% (Teva), hexadecylamide derivative of hyaluronic acid - no speciﬁc code:

Hyaluronan or derivative, durolane, for intra-articular injection, 1

J7318

mg

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

9/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Hyaluronan or derivitive, genvisc 850, for intra-articular

J7320

injection, 1 mg

Hyaluronan or derivative, hyalgan, supartz or visco-3, for intra-

J7321

articular injection, per dose

Hyaluronan or derivative, hymovis, for intra-articular injection, 1

J7322

mg

Hyaluronan or derivative, Euflexxa, for intra-articular injection,

J7323

per dose

Hyaluronan or derivative, Orthovisc, for intra-articular injection,

J7324

per dose

Hyaluronan or derivative, Synvisc, or Synvisc-One for intra-

J7325

articular injection, 1 mg

Hyaluronan or derivative, Gel-One, for intra-articular injection,

J7326

per dose

Hyaluronan or derivative, Monovisc, for intra-articular injection,

J7327

per dose

Hyaluronan or derivative, for intra-articular injection, 0.1 mg

J7328

[Gel-Syn]

Hyaluronan or derivative, Trivisc, for intra-articular injection, 1

J7329

mg

Hyaluronan or derivative, synojoynt, for intra-articular injection,

J7331

1 mg

Hyaluronan or derivative, triluron, for intra-articular injection, 1

J7332

mg

HCPCS codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB:

Sorbitol, viscoelastic hydrogel Hymovis MO.RE – no speciﬁc code:

Injection, amobarbital, up to 125 mg

J0300

Injection, bupivicaine, not otherwise specified, 0.5 mg

J0665

Injection, betamethasone acetate 3 mg and betamethasone

J0702

sodium phosphate 3 mg [not covered if used with

viscosupplement]

Injection, methylprednisolone acetate, 20 mg [not covered if

J1020

used with viscosupplement]

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

10/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Injection, methylprednisolone acetate, 40 mg [not covered if

J1030

used with viscosupplement]

Injection, methylprednisolone acetate, 80 mg [not covered if

J1040

used with viscosupplement]

Injection, dexamethasone acetate, 1 mg [not covered if used

J1094

with viscosupplement]

Injection, dexamethasone sodium phosphate, 1 mg [not

J1100

covered if used with viscosupplement]

Injection, hydrocortisone acetate, up to 25 mg [not covered if

J1700

used with viscosupplement]

Injection, hydrocortisone sodium phosphate, up to 50 mg [not

J1710

covered if used with viscosupplement]

Injection, hydrocortisone sodium succinate, up to 100 mg [not

J1720

covered if used with viscosupplement]

Injection, lidocaine hcl for intravenous infusion, 10 mg [not

J2001

covered if used with viscosupplement]

Injection, mannitol, 25% in 50 ml

J2150

Injection, prednisolone acetate, up to 1 ml [not covered if used

J2650

with viscosupplement]

Injection, methylprednisolone sodium succinate, up to 40 mg

J2920

[not covered if used with viscosupplement]

Injection, methylprednisolone sodium succinate, up to 125 mg

J2930

[not covered if used with viscosupplement]

Injection, triamcinolone acetonide, preservative free, 1 mg [not

J3300

covered if used with viscosupplement]

Injection, triamcinolone acetonide, not otherwise specified, 10

J3301

mg [not covered if used with viscosupplement]

Injection, triamcinolone diacetate, per 5 mg [not covered if used

J3302

with viscosupplement]

Injection, triamcinolone hexacetonide, per 5 mg [not covered if

J3303

used with viscosupplement]

Other HCPCS codes related to the CPB:

Injection, diclofenac sodium, 0.5 mg

J1130

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

11/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

ICD-10 codes covered if selection criteria are met:

Osteoarthritis of knee [not covered for viscosupplementation

M17.0 -

injection for patellofemoral arthritis]

M17.32

M17.4 - M17.5 Other bilateral or unilateral secondary osteoarthritis of knee [not

covered for viscosupplementation injection for patellofemoral

arthritis]

Osteoarthritis of knee, unspecified [not covered for

M17.9

viscosupplementation injection for patellofemoral arthritis]

ICD-10 codes not covered for indications listed in the CPB (not all-inclusive):

Lesion of plantar nerve [entrapment syndrome]

G57.60 -

G57.63

Spastic hemiplegia [hemiparesis]

G81.10-

G81.14

Arthropathic psoriasis

L40.50 -

L40.59

Palindromic rheumatism

M12.30 -

M12.39

Osteoarthrosis and allied disorders [joints other than knee]

M15.0 - M16.9

M18.0 -

M19.93

Hallux rigidus

M20.20 –

M20.22

Chondromalacia patellae

M22.40 -

M22.42

Contracture, hip [femoro-acetabular impingement]

M24.551 -

M24.559

Pain in knee

M25.561 -

M25.569

Temporomandibular joint disorders

M26.601 -

M26.69

Hemophilic arthropathy

M36.2

Disorder of muscle, unspecified [stiffness]

M62.9

Neuralgia and neuritis, unspecified [peripheral nerve pain]

M79.2

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

12/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Code

Code Description

Osteochondritis dissecans

M93.20 -

M93.29

Background

U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-Approved Indications

Treatment of pain in osteoarthritis of the knee in patients who

have failed to respond adequately to conservative non-

pharmacologic therapy and simple analgesics (e.g.,

acetaminophen).

Viscosupplementation is a procedure in which hyaluronate is injected into

the knee joint for treatment of osteoarthritis in the knee in persons who

have failed to respond adequately to conservative non-pharmacologic

therapy and simple analgesics (e.g., acetaminophen). Osteoarthritis (OA)

is the most common joint disorder and is a leading cause of disability,

significantly affecting a patient’s quality of life. Knee OA, in particular, is

the most common cause of mobility dependency. The heavy economic

impact of OA is a product of the cost of chronic medication use as well as

decreased productivity, as it is a leading cause of lost productive work

time.

Osteoarthritis (OA) of the knee is a disease in which the elastoviscous

properties of the synovial fluid in the knee joint becomes diminished,

resulting in less protection and shock absorption. Articular cartilage, made

up of collagen and proteoglycans, allows for joint motion without friction

and also acts as a shock absorber during impact. In OA, degeneration of

the articular cartilage causes significant pain and loss of movement as

bone rubs against bone.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

13/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

OA can be classified as either primary or secondary. Primary OA involves

the breakdown of cartilage by proteolytic enzymes called

metalloproteinases (MMP) that are released by chondrocytes. What

causes these MMP to be released, however, is still unknown. Secondary

OA is due to mechanical damage caused by a variety of factors, including

but not limited to trauma, muscle atrophy, and abnormal joint loading

(associated with obesity).

Since the etiology of primary OA is not well understood and because

there are no therapies to prevent or alter the disease process, the goals

of therapy for patients with OA are relief of pain and improvement of joint

function.

The American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons has developed

evidence based guidelines for the step-wise approach to treatment of

patients with OA. According to these guidelines, physical therapy and

exercise programs are baseline therapies and should be prescribed for all

patients diagnosed with OA either before or in conjunction with

pharmacologic therapies. Physical therapy includes general conditioning,

muscle strengthening, and range of motion exercises. In addition, durable

medical equipment such as devices for ambulation assistance,

appropriate footwear, and bracing should be considered if appropriate.

Symptomatic relief should first be addressed with simple analgesics,

including acetaminophen or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs

(NSAIDs), either selective or nonselective, depending on patient specific

factors. Patients should be reassessed in 1-4 weeks. For patients that

have failed therapy, imaging tests should be performed and further

patient education and physical therapy options should be sought out.

Tramadol and opioids may be used as adjuncts for pain relief if

necessary. If systemic therapy is ineffective, topical therapy with

capsaicin, topical NSAIDs, or topical salicylates may be considered for

short-term management of mild-moderate pain. Some controlled studies

show the benefit of glucosamine/chondroiton combinations in subgroups

of OA patients as well.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

14/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

In cases where simple analgesics have been deemed ineffective, intra-

articular injections may provide benefit. Intra-articular glucocorticoid

injections are approved for short-term therapy only, as long term therapy

has been shown to cause further damage to the joint.

Viscosupplementation is a therapeutic modality for the treatment of

osteoarthritis based on the physiologic importance of hyaluronan in

synovial joints (Bellamy, 2002). Hyaluronan, also known as sodium

hyaluronate, is a natural complex sugar of the glycosaminoglycan family

that is produced by the body and found in high amounts in the joints. The

body’s own hyaluronan acts as a lubricant and shock absorber and is

needed in order for the joint to work properly. Thus, the therapeutic goal

of viscosupplementation is to restore the visco-elasticity of synovial

hyaluronan, thereby decreasing pain, improving mobility and restoring the

natural protective functions of hyaluronan in the joint. The short-term

mode of action of viscosupplementation is believed to be based on the

pain relieving effect of the elastoviscous fluid in the affected joint. In the

long-term, the restoration of the joint mobility due to relief of pain triggers

a sequence of events, which restores the trans-synovial flow and

subsequently the metabolic and rheological homeostasis of the joint.

Controlled studies show that viscosupplementation with intra-articular

injections of hyaluronate improve joint symptoms and may be effective in

patients with mild-moderate degenerative joint disease of the knee.

In May 1997, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved sodium

hyaluronate (Hyalgan), an injectable form of hyaluronic acid (HA), for the

treatment of pain associated with knee OA. In November 1996, the

Orthopedics and Rehabilitation Devices Panel of the FDA recommended

Synvisc for approval in the United States, with the condition that a post-

market study be performed. Hylan G-F 20 (Synvisc and Synvisc One), a

cross-linked preparation of hyaluronan, is a viscosupplementation drug

injected into knee joints to increase the elastoviscous properties of

arthritic joint (synovial) fluid, while at the same time slowing its egress

from the joint. Trials have indicated that both compounds appear to result

in a small but statistically significant improvement in reducing pain and

increasing levels of mobility in the majority of individuals treated, as

compared with placebo, and may even slow down deterioration of joints.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

15/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Sodium hyaluronate is available as Hyalgan as a 10 mg/mL solution in 2

mL vials and 2 mL pre-filled syringes for intra-articular injection. Hyalgan

(sodium hyaluoronate) is usually given as weekly intra-articular injections

administered for up to 5 weeks, for a total of 5 injections. Some patients

may benefit with a total of 3 injections given at weekly intervals.

Noticeable improvements usually occur beginning at week 5 after

treatment initiation, and symptom relief may last for 6 months. Hyalgan

should not be used to treat joint dysfunction. In clinical trials, patients

experienced pain relief through Week 26.

In a prospective cohort study, Neustadt (2003) evaluated the long-term

efficacy and safety of 5 weekly intra-articular (i.a.) injections of sodium

hyaluronate (Hyalgan) in 76 patients (92 knees) with moderate to severe

OA of the knee whose pain was not controlled by conventional measures.

Thirteen patients had a repeat treatment course. A total of 72% of

patients achieved greater than 50% improvement (defined by physical

examination and assessment of pain using a visual analog scale [VAS])

for 1 year or longer; 9% of patients failed to achieve greater than 50%

improvement for any period of time. The duration of response exceeded 2

years in some patients. Total knee replacement surgery was avoided or

significantly delayed in 15 of 19 patients who were considering surgery

prior to the injections. Ten of 15 (67%) knees improved after a repeat

treatment course. Local adverse events were minor and infrequent. The

author concluded that i.a. sodium hyaluronate was an effective and safe

treatment for pain in difficult-to-treat patients with moderate to severe OA

of the knee.

Supartz (sodium hyaluronate) was approved by the FDA on January 24,

2001. It is indicated for the treatment of pain in OA of the knee in patients

who have failed to respond adequately to conservative non-

pharmacologic therapy (e.g., physical therapy) and simple analgesics

(e.g., acetaminophen).

Sodium hyaluronate is available as Supartz as a 10mg/mL solution in 2.5

mL pre-filled syringes for intra-articular injection. Supartz is administered

by an injection once-weekly for a total of 5 injections. There is no

published data on the safety or efficacy of retreatment.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

16/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

In 2015, Bioventus launches Supartz FX which exapanded the safety

label for repeat injection cycles in knee OA (Bioventus, 2015). Supartz FX

is supplied as a sterile, non-pyrogenic solution in 2.5 mL pre-filled syringe

administered once a week for a total of 5 injections. Each 2.5 mL contains

25 mg of sodium hyaluronate (hyaluronan).

Sodium hyaluronate is available as Euflexxa as a 10 mg/mL solution in 2

mL pre-filled syringes for intra-articular injection. Euflexxa (sodium

hyaluronate) is three intra-articular injections, of 2 mL each, given one

week apart. The labeling states that there is no published data on the

safety or efficacy of retreatment.

Two formulations of Hylan GF-20 are currently available: Synvisc as a 16

mg/2 mL solution in 2 mL pre-filled syringes and Synvisc-One as a 48

mg/6 mL solution in 6 mL pre-filled syringes for intra-articular

injection. Synvisc is administered once-weekly for a total of 3 intra-

articular injections, and Synvisc One is administered in a single intra-

articular injection. Published data regarding retreatment with

Synvisc demonstrated safety only.

High molecular weight hyaluronan is available as Orthovisc as a 30 mg/2

mL solution in 2 mL pre-filled syringes for intra-articular injection.

Orthovisc (hyaluornan) is injected once weekly for 3 to 4 weeks, for a

total of 3 to 4 injections. Clinical trials showed patients experienced pain

relief for 22 weeks. There is no published data on the efficacy of

retreatment.

Sodium hyaluronate is available as GenVisc 850 as 10 mg/mL solution in

3-mL pre-filled syringes for intra-articular injection. GenVisc 850 (sodium

hyaluronate) is administered by intra-articular injection. A treatment cycle

consists of five injections given at weekly intervals. Some patients may

experience benefit with three injections given at weekly intervals. The

effectiveness of less than three injections has not been evaluated. The

effectiveness of repeat treatment cycles of GenVisc 850 has not been

established.

Cross-linked hyaluronate is available as Gel-One in a 30 mg/3mL solution

in 3-mL prefilled glass syrinces. Gel-One (cross-linked hyaluronate) is

one 3.0 mL injection. Safety and effectiveness of a repeat treatment cycle

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

17/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

have not been established.

Sodium hyaluronate 0.84% is supplied as Gelsyn-3 (formerly Gel-Syn) is

supplied 8.4 mg/mL in a 2 mL pre-filled glass syringe. Gelsyn-3 (sodium

hyaluronate 0.84%) is injected once weekly for 3 consecutive weeks, for

a total of 3 injections.

Hyaluronic Acid is available as Monovisc in 22 mg/mL solution in a 5.0 mL

syringe containing 4.0 mL of Monovisc for intra-articular injection.

Monovisc (hyaluronic acid) is one 5.0 mL injection.

Hyaluronic acid is available as Hymovis as a set of 2 single-use 5mL

syringes, each containing a 3mL dose of treatment for intra-articular

injection. Hymovis (hyaluronic acid) has a treatment cycle of two

injections containing 3 mL dose of treatment one week apart.

In a prospective, multi-center, open label, phase III clinical study,

Benazzo et al (2016) evaluated the long-term efficacy and safety of

Hymovis in the symptomatic treatment of knee osteoarthritis (OA). Two

intra-articular injections (3 mL) of Hymovis (8 mg/mL HYADD 4) were

administered 1 week apart at the beginning of the study on day 0 and day

7 and after 6 months from baseline, on day 182 and 189. Follow-up

assessment were conducted for 52 weeks. The study included 50

subjects, 40 years old and older, with confirmed knee OA who had pain in

the target knee. The variables considered were: WOMAC questionnaire,

Joint Space Width (JSW), OMERACT OARSI responder criteria, EQ-5D

questionnaire, rescue medication consumption. After the injections of

Hymovis, pain perceived by the patient when walking on a flat surface

(WOMAC A1 score) significantly improved at the end of the study respect

to the baseline. WOMAC stiffness, physical function and total score

significantly improved during the study since 3 months after treatment,

and was maintained up to the end of the study (p < 0.001). By the x-ray

analysis of knee, a radiological progression of OA was observed in the

26% of patients at the end of the study, while 88% of patients result to be

responder to the therapy classified as per OMERACT-OARSI criteria. The

EQ-5D weighted index increased significantly, against baseline, at each

study time point (p < 0.001). Investigator's and patient's global

assessment of the disease measured by the VAS both show a marked

improvement in patient's health conditions. The authors concluded that

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

18/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

the results from this study confirm that Hymovis alleviates the knee pain

since the first treatment cycle. The patients treated with two cycles of

intra-articular injections of Hymovis had a progressive pain reduction that

was maintained up to one year after the treatment start with improvement

of all the scores considered in this study. Thus, Hymovis is effective and

safe in symptomatic treatment of painful knee OA.

Sodium hyaluronate is available as Visco-3 (Bioventus LLC), which is

indicated for the treatment of pain in osteoarthritis (OA) of the knee in

patients who have failed to respond adequately to conservative non-

pharmacologic therapy and simple analgesics, e.g., acetaminophen.

Each one mL of Visco-3 contains 10 mg of sodium hyaluronate

(hyaluronan) dissolved in a physiological saline (1.0% solution). The

sodium hyaluronate (hyaluronan) is extracted from chicken combs.

Sodium hyaluronate (hyaluronan) is a polysaccharide containing

repeating disaccharide units of glucuronic acid and N-acetylglucosamine.

Supplied as a sterile, non-pyogenic solution in 2.5 mL prefilled syringe

(FDA, 2018). See Appendix for dosing information.

Sodium hyaluronate is available as TriVisc in a 3 mL prefilled syringe

containing 2.5 mL of TriVisc. TriVisc is indicated for the treatment of pain

in osteoarthritis of the knee in patients who have failed to respond

adequately to conservative non-pharmacologic therapy and simple

analgesics, e.g., acetaminophen. TriVisc is administered by intra-articular

injection as 3 doses, one week apart. TriVisc has the same chemical

composition as GenVisc 850, except that GenVisc 850 is administered

under a weekly 5-injection regimen of 2.5 ml per injection. Since TriVisc is

of identical chemical formulation to GenVisc 850 (previously approved

under P140005), all of the nonclinical studies used to provide evidence of

the reasonable assurance of the safety of GenVisc 850 apply directly to

TriVisc. The effectiveness of TriVisc was established from various

nonclinical comparison studies of TriVisc and VISCO-3, which as the

same indications for use as TriVisc and is also administered under a

weekly 3-injection regimen of 2.5 ml per injection.

There is a lack of reliable evidence that any one brand of

viscosupplement is superior to other brands for medically necessary

indications. There are also a lack of studies demonstrating that persons

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

19/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

who fail to respond to one brand of viscosupplement will respond to

other brands of viscosupplements.

There is a lack of evidence in the peer-reviewed published medical

literature on the impact of fluroscopic guidance in improving clinical

outcomes of viscosupplementation injections of the knee. There are no

published peer-reviewed clinical studies demonstrating improved

outcomes of viscosupplementation of the knee when administered with

fluoroscopic guidance.

The use of an operating room and an anesthesiologist for intra-articular

injections is not necessary.

In 2000, the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) updated its

guidelines for the treatment of OA of the knee. In mild symptomatic OA,

treatment may be limited to patient education, physical and occupational

therapy and other non-pharmacologic modalities, and pharmacologic

therapy including non-opioid oral and topical analgesics. In patients who

are unresponsive to this regimen, the use of NSAIDs is appropriate.

According to ACR guidelines, intra-articular injections of corticosteroids or

hyaluronan may be used for patients who fail to respond to management

that is more conservative. Patients with severe symptomatic OA of the

knee may require surgical intervention, e.g., osteotomy or total joint

arthroplasty. The guidelines on knee pain from the American College of

Orthopedic Surgeons (1999) and the National Institute for Health and

Clinical Excellence (2007) also recommend use of intra-articular steroids

in patients with OA of the knee that fail to respond to more conservative

measures (e.g., NSAIDs or acetaminophen, physical therapy, decreased

activity). According to the literature, patients with joint effusions and local

tenderness may have greater benefit from intra-articular steroid

injections. Neither patient function, radiographic features, intra-articular

crystals nor a raised synovial fluid cell count predict a good response

(Creamer, 1997). At the basic science level, there are a number of

mechanisms by which the improvement is thought to occur -- mRNA

synthesis, B and T cell function, cytokine levels, metalloproteases and

synovial permeability (Creamer 1997, Genovese 1998). The benefits of

corticosteroids may also be due to relief of effusions from aspiration and

disruption of adhesions within the joint. Although there are only a limited

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

20/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

number of studies that have directly compared the viscosupplementation

with corticosteroid injections, these studies indicate that corticosteroid

injections are as effective as viscosupplementation in the treatment of OA

of the knee (Johnston, 2003). The most serious complication is septic

arthritis, with an incidence of 1/17,000 to 1/50,000 (SCHIN, 2002). There

is a risk of local tissue atrophy and depigmentation, particularly when

small joints are injected with potent corticosteroids. Concern about

progressive joint damage following repeated corticosteroid injections is

controversial; despite the large number of people treated with intra-

articular corticosteroids, case reports that suggest this may result in joint

damage are rare (SCHIN, 2002). According to available literature, it is

inadvisable to treat patients with a complete collapse of joint space or

bone loss with intra-articular hyaluronic acid or corticosteroids, given their

poor clinical response (Evanich et al, 2001).

Viscosupplementation is a therapeutic modality for the treatment of

osteoarthritis based on the physiologic importance of hyaluronan in

synovial joints (Bellamy, 2002). Its therapeutic goal is to restore the

visco-elasticity of synovial hyaluronan, thereby decreasing pain,

improving mobility and restoring the natural protective functions of

hyaluronan in the joint. The short-term mode of action of

viscosupplementation is believed to be based on the pain relieving effect

of the elastoviscous fluid in the affected joint. In the long-term, the

restoration of the joint mobility due to relief of pain triggers a sequence of

events, which restores the trans-synovial flow and subsequently the

metabolic and rheological homeostasis of the joint.

According to a review of the literature in the journal Clinical Evidence

(Scott and Kowalczyk, 2006), compared with placebo, intra-articular

hyaluronan and hyaluronan derivatives may improve knee pain and

function compared with placebo at up to 13 weeks after injection, but may

have no longer-term benefits. The review stated that this conclusion is

based upon low-quality evidence. The assessment also found that,

compared with intra-articular corticosteroids, hyaluronan may be more

effective than intra-articular corticosteroids at reducing pain at 5 to 13

weeks, although they may be as effective as each other in the shorter

term. According to the review, this conclusion is based upon very low-

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

21/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

quality evidence. The assessment also noted that there is no evidence

on the effectiveness of subsequent courses of hyaluronan, and if

diminishing returns exist.

Kirwan (1997) reviewed 10 clinical trials of hyaluronan of the knee joint.

The review found slightly greater benefit from the injections versus

placebo at 1 to 6 months after treatment. Of 4 subsequently published

randomized controlled trials (RCTs), 3 (Lohmander, 1996; Corrado et al,

1995; Formiguera, 1995) found no significant difference versus placebo

at 2 to 5 months after treatment, but both active and placebo groups

improved compared with baseline. One of the trials (240 people)

included a subgroup analysis of people aged over 60 years with

moderate to severe symptoms; these benefited more with active

treatment than placebo (Lohmander, 1996). The 4th subsequent RCT,

involving 100 people, found significant benefit on a standardized pain

assessment tool (the Lequense index) with hyaluronan versus placebo,

both at 5 weeks and 4 months (Huskisson, 1999). Another RCT also

found a trend toward greater pain relief and functional recovery in

patients treated with intra-articular hyaluronan versus placebo injection,

but the differences between the 2 groups were not statistically significant

(Tamir, 2001).

Bellamy (2002) viewed the evidence comparing viscosupplementation to

steroid injections. One RCT reviewed by Bellamy (2002) found a benefit

of hyaluronan at 5 and 8 weeks against steroids, but no difference in

effect between steroid and hyaluronan injections was found in 2 other

RCTs.

An assessment of viscosupplementation for knee OA by the Canadian

Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) (Dagenais, 2006)

found that evidence suggests modest short-term reductions in pain and

improvements in function, and no superiority among viscosupplement

products. Adverse events are rare, benign, temporary, and likely

associated with the intra-articular injection. The assessment reported

that clinical practice guidelines and evidence suggest that this approach

is most suitable for patients with mild to moderate knee OA, and in those

for whom other approaches are contraindicated, or have failed.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

22/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Guidance from the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence

(2008) found that the research evidence on the efficacy of

viscosupplementation is often difficult to interpret because of confounders

including different molecular weights of hyaluronans, different injection

schedules (ranging from once-weekly to a series of 5 injections), poor trial

design despite large numbers of studies (e.g., lack of intention-to-treat

analyses, limitations in blinding). The guidance concludes that the

evidence seems to suggest a benefit for reducing pain up to 3 months

after a series of 3 to 5 injections, although the effect size is generally

small. "Given this, and the cost of the therapies together with increased

clinician visits required for injections, there appears to be a poor rationale

for routine clinical use." The guidance noted that clinical trials do not

suggest subgroups of OA patients who may have greater benefit from

viscosupplementation.

An assessment by AETMIS (2007) reached similar conclusions to

the NICE guidance. The AETMIS assessment concluded that

viscosupplementation offers clinically modest relief from the symptoms of

knee OA over a period that could last up to several weeks. The

assessment found viscosupplementation to be a safe short-term

treatment. The assessment noted, however, that these conclusion are

based on secondary analyses of a multitude of small primary studies of

poor methodological quality. AETMIS reported that available data did not

help distinguish differences in the effectiveness of any one product over

the others. They were also unable to identify patient subgroups more

likely to benefit from this treatment compared with other available

therapeutic modalities. AETMIS concluded that, given the modest

effectiveness of viscosupplementation compared with its relatively high

cost and the additional professional resources required to administer it, it

is not currently justified to contemplate funding viscosupplementation for

all patients with OA of the knee. The assessment noted, however, that it

is possible that viscosupplementation could be offered as a last-resort

treatment to patients who do not achieve pain relief from conventional

therapies or for whom these are contraindicated.

A systematic evidence review prepared by the BlueCross BlueShield

Association Technology Evaluation Center Evidence-based Practice

Center for the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (Samson et

al, 2007) concluded: "Viscosupplementation trials generally report

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

23/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

positive effects on pain and function scores compared to placebo, but the

evidence on clinical benefit is uncertain, due to variable trial quality,

potential publication bias, and unclear clinical significance of the changes

reported."

More recently, the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons

(2013) concluded that they "cannot recommend using hyaluronic acid for

patients with symptomatic osteoarthritis of the knee." This conclusion

was a strong recommendation., and was based on a metaanalysis of

studies that failed to show a clinically significant benefit from

viscosupplementation. The 2013 AAOS conclusions were more definitive

than the previous American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons' clinical

guideline on the treatment of OA of the knee (2008), which stated that the

AAOS can not recommend for or against use of intra-articular HA

injections.

American College of Rheumatology clinical practice guidelines on

osteoarthritis (Hochberg, et al., 2012) conclude that they have no

recommendations regarding the use of intraarticular hyaluronates in the

knee and hip.

Guidelines on osteoarthritis from the National Institute for Health

and Care Excellence (NICE, 2014) state: "Do not offer intra-articular

hyaluronan injections for the management of osteoarthritis."

Rutjes et al (2012) evaluated the benefits and risks of

viscosupplementation for adults with symptomatic knee osteoarthritis.

Databases used were MEDLINE (1966 to January 2012), EMBASE (1980

to January 2012), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials

(1970 to January 2012), and other sources. Randomized trials in any

language that compared viscosupplementation with sham or

nonintervention control in adults with knee osteoarthritis were selected for

analysis. Primary outcomes were pain intensity and flare-ups.

Secondary outcomes included function and serious adverse events.

Reviewers used duplicate abstractions, assessed study quality, pooled

data using a random-effects model, examined funnel plots, and explored

heterogeneity using meta-regression. A total of 89 trials involving 12,667

adults met inclusion criteria -- 68 had a sham control, 40 had a follow-up

duration greater than 3 months, and 22 used cross-linked forms of

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

24/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

hyaluronic acid. Overall, 71 trials (9,617 patients) showed that

viscosupplementation moderately reduced pain (effect size, -0.37 [95 %

confidence interval [CI]: -0.46 to -0.28]). There was important between-

trial heterogeneity and an asymmetrical funnel plot: Trial size, blinded

outcome assessment, and publication status were associated with effect

size. Five unpublished trials (1,149 patients) showed an effect size of

0.03 (CI: -0.14 to 0.09). Eighteen large trials with blinded outcome

assessment (5,094 patients) showed a clinically irrelevant effect size of

0.11 (CI: -0.18 to -0.04). Six trials (811 patients) showed that

viscosupplementation increased, although not statistically significantly,

the risk for flare-ups (relative risk, 1.51 [CI: 0.84 to 2.72]). Fourteen trials

(3,667 patients) showed that viscosupplementation increased the risk for

serious adverse events (relative risk, 1.41 [CI: 1.02 to 1.97]). The authors

concluded that the benefit of viscosupplementation on pain and function

in patients with symptomatic osteoarthritis of the knee is minimal or non-

existent. Because of increased risk for serious adverse events and local

adverse events, the administration of these preparations should be

discouraged.

Although some have argued that viscosupplements can avoid the risks of

nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications and opiates, and delay the

need for knee replacement surgery, there is a lack of reliable evidence

that viscosupplements reduces the quantity of NSAIDs and opiates, delay

disease progression, or reduce knee replacement surgeries.

There is limited evidence of the effectiveness of repeat viscosupplement

treatments. Available evidence is limited to uncontrolled case series, so

that improvements following repeat treatment may be due to the natural

history of the condition and placebo effects. Evidence submitted to the

FDA regarding repeat treatment consisted of 2 studies. One study, by

Scali et al (1995) was an uncontrolled study of 5 weekly injections of

viscosupplementation repeated every 6 months for 30 months, for a total

of 25 injections. A second study by Kotz and Kolarz (1999) examined the

effectiveness of viscosupplementation in 108 patients, 14 of whom

received repeat injections within 4 to 8 months due to pain recurrence, 6

of whom completed 12 month follow-up. Guidance from the National

Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE, 2007) found that the

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

25/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

evidence seems to suggest a benefit for reducing pain up to 3 months

after a series of 3 to 5 injections, although the effect size is generally

small.

In a randomized controlled trial, Juni et al (2007) compared the safety

and effectiveness of intra-articular hylan and 2 hyaluronic acids (HAs) in

OA of the knee (n = 660). Patients were randomly assigned to receive 1

cycle of 3 intra-articular injections per knee of 1 of 3 preparations: (i) a

high molecular weight cross-linked hylan, (ii) a non-cross-linked

medium molecular weight HA of avian origin, or (iii) a non-cross-

linked low molecular weight HA of bacterial origin. The primary

outcome measure was the change in the Western Ontario and McMaster

Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) pain score at 6 months.

Secondary outcome measures included local adverse events (effusions

or flares) in injected knees. During months 7 to 12, patients were offered

a 2nd cycle of viscosupplementation. Pain relief was similar in all 3

groups. The difference in changes between baseline and 6 months

between hylan and the combined HAs was 0.1 on the WOMAC pain

score (95 % CI: -0.2 to 0.3). No relevant differences were observed in

any of the secondary efficacy outcomes, and stratified analyses provided

no evidence for differences in effects across different patient groups.

There was a trend toward more local adverse events in the hylan group

than in the HA groups during the first cycle (difference 2.2 % [95 % CI:

2.4 to 6.7]), and this trend became more pronounced during the second

cycle (difference 6.4 % [95 % CI: 0.6 to 12.2]). The authors concluded

that there was no evidence for a difference in effectiveness between

hylan and HAs. In view of its higher costs and potential for more local

adverse events, these investigators see no rationale for the continued

use of hylan in patients with knee OA.

The Galacian Agency for Health Technology Assessment (Fernandez

Lopez and Ruano-Ravina, 2005) systematically reviewed the evidence for

the use of viscosupplementation in hip osteoarthritis. The authors of the

systematic review identified seven clinical trials that met the inclusion

criteria and one systematic review. The number of patients in the trials

ranged from 22 to 104. Five trials had no control group, one compared 2

viscosupplements of different molecular weight, and the remainder

compared viscosupplements with administration of intra-articular

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

26/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

glucocorticoids and with a group that received placebo. Relief of pain

was estimated to be around 40 % to 50 % by most studies, though the

duration of this effect post-treatment was not known. The authors

reported that the RCT with 3 arms reported no differences between the

treatments at the end of the follow-up period. Moreover, this study

displayed the highest quality of all those included. The authors

concluded that the absence of a control group in most of the clinical trials

means that there is no way of ascertaining the effectiveness of

viscosupplements in hip OA. Accordingly, viscosupplements "should not

be used outside the ambit of experimental studies until better-quality

evidence is available."

In a review on viscosupplementation in the treatment for patients with

hip OA, Conrozier and Vignon (2005) concluded that to date, in the

absence of placebo-controlled studies, the effectiveness of intra-articular

injections of hyaluronic acid or its derivatives in the symptomatic

treatment of hip OA can not be determined conclusively. Nevertheless

the published data suggest that viscosupplementation may be effective.

These researchers stated that double-blind, controlled studies are

needed to confirm these data, before viscosupplementation should be

included into the treatment paradigm for patients with hip OA.

Migliore et al (2006) reported the effects of hylan G-F 20 administered

through ultrasound (US)-guided intra-articular (IA) injections in patients

with symptomatic hip OA. They treated 30 patients with symptomatic hip

OA. Under US guidance, 7 patients received 1 injection, 21 patients

had 2 injections, and 2 patients received 3 injections, each with 2 ml of

hylan G-F 20. Lequesne index, visual analog scale (VAS) scale of hip

pain, and NSAID consumption were evaluated at baseline as well as 2

and 6 months after the beginning of the treatment. No systemic adverse

events were observed. Lequesne index, VAS pain score, and NSAID

consumption showed a reduction that was statistically significant to the

baseline. The present observation suggested the potentiality for the

safety and effectiveness of hylan G-F 20 injected under US guidance in

patients with symptomatic hip OA. The authors stated that further

controlled studies are needed.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

27/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

The Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health's report on IA

hyaluronic acid for hip OA (Dagenais, 2007) stated that the best available

evidence suggests that hyaluronic acid may offer symptomatic relief in

patients with mild to moderate hip OA for whom other conservative

therapies are contraindicated or have failed. Currently, there is

insufficient good quality evidence to determine this conclusively.

van den Bekerom et al (2008) evaluated the effectiveness

of viscosupplementation in the treatment of hip OA. A total of 16 articles

concerning the effectiveness of a total of 509 patients undergoing

viscosupplementation for hip OA were included -- 12 European studies, 3

Turkish studies and 1 American study with levels of evidence ranging

from I to IV evaluated the following products: Hylan G-F 20, Hyalgan,

Ostenil, Durolane, Fermatron and Orthovisc. Heterogeneity of included

studies did not allow pooled analysis of data. The authors noted that

despite the relatively low level of evidence of the included

studies, viscosupplementation performed under fluoroscopic or

ultrasound guidance seems an effective treatment and may be an

alternative treatment of hip OA. Intra-articular injection of (derivatives of)

hyaluronan (HA) into the hip joint appears to be safe and well-tolerated.

However, the authors stated that viscosupplementation can not be

recommended as standard therapy in hip OA for wider populations, and

therefore the indications remain a highly individualized matter.

Conrozier et al (2009) assessed the effectiveness and tolerability of a

single intra-articular injection of non-animal-stabilized HA (NASHA) in

patients treated for symptomatic hip OA (HOA). A total of 40 patients

suffering from HOA were treated by a single intra-articular injection of

NASHA in the painful hip under fluoroscopy. Patient global assessment

(PGA) and walking pain (WP) on a 100-mm VAS, WOMAC index, and

Lequesne index were assessed at each visit. Treatment effectiveness

was assessed using OMERACT-OARSI response criteria, minimal

clinically important improvement (MCII), patient acceptable symptom

state (PASS) obtained from PGA, WOMAC and WP. Predictive factors of

effectiveness were also studied. A total of 34 patients were assessable

(mean follow-up of 159 days). All clinical variables (WP, PGA, WOMAC,

Lequesne index) decreased significantly between baseline and last

evaluation. Twenty-two patients (71 %) were classified OMERACT-

OARSI responders, 25 subjects (75.8 %) were classified PASS+, and 19

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

28/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

(61.3 %) fulfilled criteria for MCII. Out of clinical and radiological

variables only Lequesne index (p = 0.04) and WOMAC (p = 0.04) at

baseline were found to be predictive of treatment effectiveness; the

treatment was well-tolerated. There were no severe adverse events

related to the treatment or to the procedure. However 15 of the 28

assessable patients experienced transient increase of pain in the target

hip during the first week following injection. The authors concluded that

viscosupplementation of the hip with NASHA is easily feasible in daily

clinical practice, safe and well-tolerated despite a frequent increase of

pain the days following injection. Moreover, they stated that prospective,

controlled trials are needed to confirm these data and to evaluate both

safety and effectiveness of a second course of treatment.

In a pilot study, Salk and colleagues (2005) examined the safety and

effectiveness of viscosupplementation with sodium hyaluronate versus

phosphate-buffered saline control for pain associated with OA of the

ankle. Results of this study suggested that 5 weekly intra-articular

injections of sodium hyaluronate in patients who have OA of the ankle are

well-tolerated, can provide sustained relief of pain, and improve ankle

function. These findings are consistent with previously published studies

using intra-articular injections of sodium hyaluronate in other articular

joints but require confirmation in a large, randomized, saline-controlled

study. These investigators concluded that if confirmed, these findings

would provide a valuable non-operative treatment option for patients who

have OA of the ankle.

Carpenter and Motley (2008) noted that although anecdotal data exist, no

long-term studies regarding the use of viscosupplementation in the ankle

have been published to date. These researchers compared pain

reduction following ankle arthroscopy versus that following ankle

arthroscopy combined with weekly intra-articular instillation of hylan G-F

20 during the first 3 post-operative weeks. They found that both

treatment groups experienced statistically significantly decreased pain

following the intervention (p = 0.002 and p = 0.0009 for the arthroscopy

alone and arthroscopy plus hylan groups, respectively), and that those

who received 3 intra-articular injections of hylan G-F 20 following ankle

arthroscopy improved statistically significantly (p = 0.0014) more than did

those who underwent arthroscopy as a sole therapy. These preliminary

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

29/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

results suggested that viscosupplementation combined with arthroscopy

may be more beneficial than arthroscopy alone, and provide further

insight into the role of viscosupplementation in the treatment of ankle OA.

van Brakel and Eygendaal (2006) assessed the safety and effectiveness

of IA injection of hyaluronic acid in 19 consecutive elbows with post-

traumatic OA. In 18 patients (10 male and 8 female patients; mean age

of 45.6 years [SD, 15.0 years]), 3 injections of sodium hyaluronate were

given within 4 weeks at regular intervals. Evaluation took place just

before the first injection, as well as after 3 and 6 months, and consisted of

the Elbow Function Assessment Score, the Functional Rating Index of

Broberg and Morrey, and the Modified Andrews Elbow Scoring System.

Pain was also assessed by means of VAS. Viscosupplementation

resulted in slight, short-term pain relief and a very limited decrease in

activity impairment at evaluation after 3 months. After 6 months, no

beneficial effects were noticed in any of the 19 injected elbows. Other

parameters were not influenced by treatment with viscosupplementation

at any time. Systemic or local adverse effects did not occur. The authors

concluded that because the use of viscosupplementation for the

treatment of post-traumatic OA of the elbow provides only slight, short-

term pain relief and a very limited decrease in activity impairment and the

other parameters were not modified, viscosupplementation is not suitable

for this indication.

In a pilot study, Cleary and colleagues (2008) examined the potential

effectiveness of HA injection therapy in the treatment of lumbar facet joint

arthritis. A total of13 patients with symptomatic lumbar facet joint arthritis

who met the inclusion criteria were prospectively recruited. Pre-treatment

evaluation of patients was by questionnaire, including the VAS and

Oswestry Disability Questionnaire. A single injection of HA into affected

facet joints was then performed, with correct placement confirmed on

fluoroscopy. Patients were similarly evaluated 6 weeks after treatment. A

total of 18 facets were injected with HA. At 6-week follow-up, there was

no significant improvement in pain when measured on the VAS. There

was also no significant improvement in the Oswestry Disability

Questionnaire. The authors concluded that preliminary results from this

pilot study did not demonstrate any benefit of viscosupplementation in the

management of symptomatic lumbar facet joint arthropathy.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

30/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Grogan and colleagues (2009) noted that in the recent past, non-surgical

treatment of OA was limited to rest, immobilization, physical therapy,

activity modifications, NSAIDs, analgesics, weight loss, assistive devices

for walking, and corticosteroid injections. Viscosupplementation is a

welcome addition to the non-surgical armamentarium available to

physicians. It is used to introduce hyaluronic acid into the joint to provide

initial lubrication and shock absorption, and to change the long-term

disease process. These investigators discussed the pathology of OA; the

characteristics, physiology, and administration of commercial

viscosupplements; and reviewed the research on hyaluronic acid (HA)

use in the foot and ankle. They concluded that additional studies are

needed to test the safety and effectiveness of this treatment in other parts

of the foot. Furthermore, in a review on the use of HA as a treatment for

ankle OA, Sun et al (2009) stated that there is only limited published

literature relating to the use of HA in the ankle.

Salini et al (2009) evaluated the effectiveness of a single ultrasound-

guided injection of HA in patients suffering from carpo-metacarpal OA

(CMC-OA). A total of 18 patients with CMC-OA, grade 2 to 3 Kellgren

and Lawrence score were enrolled. They underwent clinical evaluation at

baseline and after 1 month follow-up, evaluating: grading of pain (VAS at

rest and during activities), function (Dreiser Index), grip and pinch

strengths Jamar dynamometer), as well as NSAIDs consumption. Each

patient received a single ultrasound-guided injection of HA into the

articular CMC joint. The results were that pain at rest and during

activities decreased from 1.8 +/- 1.07 to 0.5 +/- 0.68 (p < 0.001) and from

8.05 +/- 0.94 to 4.15 +/- 1.42 (p < 0.001), respectively. Dreiser Functional

Index showed a significant improvement (+11.59 %; p < 0.004), as well as

pulp pinch strength (24.07 %; p < 0.001). The consumption of NSAIDs

was also clearly reduced, from 16 to 7 patients (-45 %) and from 2.45 +/-

1.98 to 1.15 +/- 1.30 tablets per week (p < 0.02). Mild local side effects,

lasting less than 3 hours, were observed only in 2 cases. The authors

concluded that a single ultrasound-guided injection of HA is a safe and

effective procedure in CMC-OA, with a significant improvement in terms

of pain and function. However, they stated that studies with larger

samples and longer term follow-up are needed.

The American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons published a clinical

practice guideline on the treatment of glenohumeral osteoarthritis in the

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

31/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

adult patient population (Izquierdo et al, 2010). Of the 16

recommendations addressed, 9 are inconclusive. Two were reached by

consensus -- that physicians use peri-operative mechanical and/or

chemical venous thromboembolism prophylaxis for shoulder arthroplasty

patients and that total shoulder arthroplasty not be performed in patients

with glenohumeral OA who have an irreparable rotator cuff tear. Four

options were graded as weak: (i) the use of injectable

viscosupplementation; (ii) total shoulder arthroplasty and

hemiarthroplasty as treatment; (iii) avoiding shoulder arthroplasty by

surgeons who perform fewer than 2 shoulder arthroplasties per year

(to reduce the risk of immediate post-operative complications); and

(iv) the use of keeled or pegged all-polyethylene cemented glenoid

components. The single moderate-rated recommendation was for the

use of total shoulder arthroplasty rather than hemiarthroplasty. The

clinical guideline noted that management of glenohumeral osteoarthritis

remains controversial; the scientific evidence on this topic can be

significantly improved.

In a randomized, double-blind clinical trial, Vanelli and associates (2010)

evaluated the safety and effectiveness of intra-articular polynucleotides

(PN) gel injections in the treatment of knee OA associated with persistent

knee pain. A total of 60 patients were enrolled and randomized to receive

intra-articular polynucleotides (n = 30) or hyaluronan (n = 30); patients

received 5 weekly intra-articular knee injections and the follow-up period

was 3 months after the end of treatment. Primary endpoint was to

determine PN efficacy in reducing knee pain at the end of the study over

baseline value and over standard HA viscosupplementation. Pain levels

were measured using a 0 to 10 cm VAS. Secondary endpoints included

knee osteoarthritis outcome score (KOOS), NSAIDs consumption,

crackling during movement and articular mobility limitation. The mean

global VAS pain decreased from 5.7 +/- 1.9 cm (T0) to 1.9 +/ - 1.5 cm

(T16) in the PN group and from 4.9 +/- 2.0 cm (T0) to 2.1 +/ - 1.4 cm

(T16) in the HA group. The reduction in pain was statistically significant

for both groups. Increases of KOOS from baseline values were

statistically significant in both groups. No significant adverse events were

reported. The authors concluded that these findings suggest that intra-

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

32/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

articular PN can be a valid alternative to traditional HA supplementation

for the treatment of knee OA. These preliminary findings need to be

validated by further research.

Migliore et al (2011) evaluated the effectiveness of viscosupplementation

treatment of ankle OA in the current literature. The following databases

were searched: Medline (period 2006 to 2008), Database of Abstract on

Reviews and Effectiveness and Cochrane Database of Systematic

Reviews. Reference lists of relevant articles were controlled for

additional references. The search terms Review, Viscosupplementation

(VS), Osteoarthritis (OA), Hyaluronic acid (HA), Hyaluronan, Sodium

hyaluronate, Ankle OA, Ankle joint were used to identify all studies

relating to the use of VS therapy for the ankle OA. Methodological quality

of included studies was assessed by assigning level of evidence as

previously defined by the Centre for Evidence Based Medicine (CEBM).

A total of 7 articles concerning the efficacy of a total of 275 patients

undergoing VS treatment for ankle OA were included. One European

study, 1 Taiwanese study, 1 Italian study, 1 Turkish study and 3 American

studies with level of evidence ranging from I to IV evaluated the following

products: Hyalgan, Synvisc, Supartz, Adant. The authors concluded that

viscosupplementation is used widely in knee OA and is included in the

professional guidelines for treatment of the disease in this joint. The

potential for treating OA of the ankle joint by viscosupplementation has

been suggested in the literature, however, no dosing studies have been

published to date, and dosing in the ankle joint remains an area for

discussion. They stated that viscosupplementation could potentially

provide an useful alternative in treating such patients with painful ankle

OA.

In a randomized placebo-controlled trial, Munteanu and colleagues (2011)

evaluated the effectiveness of a single intra-articular injection of hylan G-

F 20 (Synvisc) for symptomatic first meta-tarso-phalangeal joint (MTPJ)

OA. Participants (n = 151) with symptomatic first MTPJ OA were

randomly allocated to receive up to 1 ml intra-articular injection of either

hylan G-F 20 or placebo (saline). Participants and assessors were

blinded. Outcomes were evaluated at 1, 3 and 6 months after injection.

The primary outcome measurement was the foot pain domain of the Foot

Health Status Questionnaire (FHSQ) at 3 months. Secondary outcome

measurements were foot function assessed via the FHSQ, first MTPJ

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

33/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

pain and stiffness, magnitude of symptom change, global satisfaction,

health-related quality of life (assessed using the Short-Form-36 version

two), first MTPJ dorsiflexion range of motion, hallux plantar flexion

strength, use of pain-relieving medication or co-interventions and

changes in plantar pressures. No statistically significant differences in

foot pain were found between the groups at 3 months. There were few

statistically significant differences in the secondary outcome measures.

Overall, the incidence of adverse effects was not significantly different

between groups. The authors concluded that an intra-articular injection of

hylan G-F 20 is no more effective than a placebo in reducing symptoms in

people with symptomatic first MTPJ OA.

The American Physical Therapy Association’s clinical practice guidelines

on “Plantar fasciitis” (McPoil et al, 2008) and the American College of

Foot and Ankle Surgeons’ clinical practice guideline on “The diagnosis

and treatment of heel pain” (Thomas et al, 2010) do not mention the use

of hyaluronidase.

The American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine

(ACOEM)’s occupational medicine practice guideline on “Knee disorders”

(2011) provided no recommendation on the use hyaluronic acid injections

for patellofemoral joint pain because of insufficient evidence.

Stahl et al (2005) stated that trapeziometacarpal (TMC) joint arthritis is a

disabling condition presenting with pain at the base of the thumb causing

impairment of hand function. Non-operative treatment at an early stage

includes intra-articular steroid injection. Although this treatment may

bring about prompt symptomatic relief, its effectiveness is unpredictable.

There is previous evidence that injection of sodium hyaluronate is safe

and effective in the treatment of knee arthritis. These researchers

proposed that intra-articular injection of sodium hyaluronate, for the

symptomatic treatment of TMC joint arthritis, could provide symptomatic

relief without the adverse effects of steroids. A total of 52 patients with

TMC joint grade II arthritis were randomized prospectively either for

methylprednisolone or hyaluronate intra-articular injections. Initial

evaluation included an estimation of pain, grip, pinch strengths and the

functional Purdue Pegboard Test (PPT). This evaluation was repeated

after 1, 3, and 6 months and statistically compared with the initial

evaluation. In both groups, the intra-articular injection produced a relief of

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

34/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

pain after 1 month. Grip strength improved significantly in the group

treated by the steroid during the whole evaluation period. The patients

treated by hyaluronate showed improvement in grip strength after 6

months and in the pinch and the PPT after 3 months. The authors

concluded that steroids and hyaluronate injections were found effective in

reducing pain. Hyaluronate was more effective in the improvement of

some aspects of fine hand function.

Fuchs et al (2006) performed a prospective assessment of the

effectiveness and tolerability of intra-articular sodium hyaluronate (SH;

Ostenil mini) and triamcinolone acetonide (TA; Volon A10) for treatment of

osteoarthritis (OA) of the carpometacarpal joint (CMCJ) of the thumb in a

26-week, controlled, randomized, on an intention-to-treat, masked-

observer study. Patients were treated with 3 intra-articular injections of

either SH (n = 28) or TA (n = 28). Primary assessments were pain

according to a 100-mm VAS and extensive clinical and functional

parameters such as swelling, grip power and range of motion. The

population was analyzed using 1- and 2-sided Mann-Whitney (MW)

estimators. Maximum pain relief occurred at 2 to 3 weeks for TA and at

week 26 for SH after the first intra-articular injection. At weeks 2 to 3 TA

was significantly better than SH (MW: 0.3319 and 0.3063; p = 0.9827 and

0.9929). At week 26 a slight superiority of SH could be observed (MW:

0.53; p = 0.3624) and non-inferiority could be proven. After 26 weeks

lateral pinch power was significantly better in the SH-group (MW: 0.6331;

p = 0.0226). In all, 88.0 % of patients treated with SH and 79.1 % of the

TA-group described pain improvement after 26 weeks. Both agents were

well-tolerated. No adverse events with causal connection to the

investigational products occurred. The authors concluded that a single

course of 3 SH injections is effective in relieving pain and improving joint

function in patients with OA of the CMCJ of the thumb. Although in

comparison with triamcinolone its effects were achieved more slowly, the

results indicated a superior long-lasting effect of hyaluronan at 6 months

after end of treatment period.

Roux and colleagues (2007) compared the effectiveness on pain relief

and function of 1, 2 or 3 injections of intra-articular hyaluronic acid in

symptomatic OA of the CMCJ of the thumb. Among subjects with

symptomatic OA of the CMCJ of the thumb referred to the Rheumatology

Department of Nice, patients free of any joint injection in last 6months

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

35/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

with pain VAS greater than 40 and with Kellgren and Lawrence score

between 2 and 4 were included. Each subject was randomly allocated to

receive, at weekly intervals, 1 (group 1), 2 (group 2), or 3 injections

(group 3) of 1 ml sodium hyaluronidate (Sinovial). Injections were given

under imaging control. Socio-demographic characteristics, VAS and

functionality (Dreiser Functional Index) were assessed at baseline, at 1

month and at 3 months. An intention-to-treat analysis was performed. A

total of 42 subjects were enrolled in the study. Their mean age was 64.8

(8.0) years; and 90.5 % were women. Baseline pain VAS, and mean

Dreiser functional index were 57.7 (17.1) and 12.5 (5.8), respectively. A

repeated measure analysis of variance (ANOVA) model was used to

compare the time-course profile of the 3 treatment groups for VAS and

Dreiser index. Due to statistically significant groups-time interaction the

analyses were conducted at each evaluation time. No difference was

found for VAS at 1 month (p = 0.075) and 3 months (p = 0.382). Intra-

group differences between baseline and 3 months was significant in

groups 2 and 3 (p = 0.012 and p = 0.002). The authors concluded that no

significant differences were found between each group over the study

period for pain relief and function. But the intra-groups analysis results

showed that intra-articular sodium hyaluronidate injections into the

carpometacarpal joint of the thumb in OA can be effective on pain and

function. They stated that what is now needed is a controlled placebo

randomized study with larger samples and longer term follow-up of the

achieved effects.

In a randomized, open-label, evaluator-blinded clinical study, Bahadir et

al (2009) compared the therapeutic effects of sodium hyaluronate and

corticosteroid injections on TMC joint OA. This study included 40 women

with stage II or III TMC joint osteoarthritis. The steroid group (n = 20)

received 1 injection of 20-mg triamcinolone acetonide once and the

hyaluronate group (n = 20) received 3 injections of 5-mg sodium

hyaluronate at 1-week intervals. The pain level was assessed using a

VAS and grip and pinch strengths were measured using a hand grip

dynamometer and pinch gauge. The Duruoz Hand Index was used to

evaluate hand function. Pain level decreased significantly over 12

months for the steroid group and over 6 months for the sodium

hyaluronate group. Pinch strength did not improve in either group, but

grip strength improved significantly in both groups. Hand function

improved in both groups but it was only significant in the steroid group.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

36/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

The authors concluded that these findings showed that both intra-articular

injection of steroid and sodium hyalurunate are effective in TMC joint

osteoarthritis. However the steroid injection was found to be superior to

sodium hyaluronate injection in reducing pain and improving hand

function.

Saline et al (2009) evaluated the effectiveness of a single ultrasound-

guided injection of hyaluronic acid (HA) in patients suffering from OA of

the CMCJ. A total of 18 patients with OA of the CMCJ, grade 2-3 Kellgren

and Lawrence score, attending the Orthopaedic Department of the

University Hospital of Chieti, were enrolled. They underwent clinical

evaluation at baseline and after 1 month follow-up, evaluating: grading of

pain (VAS at rest and during activities), function (Dreiser Index), grip and

pinch strengths Jamar dynamometer), as well as NSAIDs consumption.

Each patient received a single ultrasound-guided injection of HA into the

articular CMCJ. The results were that pain at rest and during activities

decreased from 1.8 +/- 1.07 to 0.5 +/- 0.68 (p < 0.001) and from 8.05 +/-

0.94 to 4.15 +/- 1.42 (p < 0.001), respectively. Dreiser Functional Index

showed a significant improvement (+11.59 %; p < 0.004), as well as pulp

pinch strength (24.07 %; p < 0.001). The consumption of NSAIDs was

also clearly reduced, from 16 to 7 patients (-45 %) and from 2.45 +/- 1.98

to 1.15 +/- 1.30 tablets per week (p < 0.02). Mild local side effects,

lasting less than 3 hours, were observed only in 2 cases. The authors

concluded that a single ultrasound-guided injection of HA is a safe and

effective procedure in the treatment of OA of the CMCJ, with a significant

improvement in terms of pain and function. Moreover, they stated that

studies with larger samples and longer term follow-up are needed.

Abate et al (2010) noted that the current therapeutic approaches of OA

(e.g., analgesics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs], COX-2

inhibitors, steroids) do not delay the OA progression or reverse joint

damage. Moreover, they may cause relevant systemic side effects.

Hyaluronic acid is a physiologic component of the synovial fluid and is

reduced in OA joints. Therefore, intra-articular injection of HA, due to its

viscoelastic properties and protective effect on articular cartilage and soft

tissue surfaces of joints, can restore the normal articular homoeostasis.

These effects are evident when HA is properly administered into the

articular space; therefore, the use of "image-guided" infiltration

techniques is mandatory. Viscosupplementation, with different HA

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

37/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

preparations (low and high molecular weight), can be considered when

the patient has not found pain relief from other therapies or is intolerant to

analgesics or NSAIDs. A 3 to 5 doses regimen is usually recommended

with 1 week interval between each injection. Several studies have shown

the effectiveness of HA for the treatment of knee OA, with positive effects

on pain, articular function (Western Ontario and McMaster Universities

Osteoarthritis Index [WOMAC], Lequesne Index [LI], range of motion

[ROM]), subjective global assessment and reduction in NSAIDs

consumption. In general, the benefit is evident within 3 months and

persists in the following 6 to 12 months. The authors stated that

encouraging but inconclusive results have also been observed for the

treatment of shoulder, CMCJ, hip and ankle OA. They concluded that

there is the need of better-designed studies to prove the effectiveness of

these medications, in order to rule out a placebo effect.

Colorado Division of Workers' Compensation’s medical treatment

guidelines on “Cumulative trauma conditions” (2010) stated that “There is

no evidence that hyaluronate injections are superior to steroid injections

for carpometacarpal (CMC) thumb arthritis. They may be tried after 3

months of conservative therapy, including steroid injections, has failed. At

the time of this guidelines writing, Hylan G-F 20 has been FDA-approved

for the treatment of pain due to osteoarthritis of the knee in patients who

have failed to respond adequately to conservative non-pharmacologic

therapy and simple analgesics”.

Singhal and Zahid (2002) reported on the case of a 27-year old man who

presented with the complaints of recurring attacks of painful inflammation

affecting finger joints of both hands for the last year. There were no

constitutional features of weight loss, fever, anemia, itching or burning

sensation over the joints. It was diagnosed to be a case of palindromic

rheumatism clinically and treated with hydroxychloroquine.

Finn et al (2010) stated that palindromic rheumatism is characterized by

multiple recurrent episodes of arthritis and peri-arthritis (mono- or oligo-

articular) that may last hours or days, disappearing without sequels.

These investigators reported a 69-year old male with a history of

hypertension and a presumptive diagnosis of gout due to recurrent

episodes of arthritis and peri-arthritis in the last 30 years. They involved

at least 2 joints, lasted few days and were self-limited. The patient was

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

38/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

admitted due to arthritis and peri-arthritis of both wrists, knees, ankles,

elbows and hands. He presented with fever (38 to 39 degrees C),

intense articular pain and anorexia. With a presumptive diagnosis of

palindromic rheumatism and the lack of response to NSAIDs,

methylprednisolone 20 mg/od per os was started, with an excellent

response.

An UpToDate review on “Clinical features of rheumatoid arthritis”

(Venables and Maini, 2013) states that “The onset of RA is episodic in a

few patients, with one to several joint areas being affected sequentially

for hours to days, with symptom free periods that may last from days to

months; an episodic pattern referred to as "palindromic rheumatism".

Patients with palindromic rheumatism have similar predisposing genetic

risk factors and exhibit a dose effect of carriage of certain HLA alleles, as

do patients with a more typical persistent presentation of RA. The

proportion of patients presenting with palindromic rheumatism who

progress to develop RA or another well-defined disease varies between

studies. In one study of 60 patients with palindromic rheumatism followed

over 20 years, 40 (67 percent) developed RA. In another study, among

147 such patients seen in a tertiary referral center, 41 were eventually

diagnosed with RA (28 percent) and 4 with other disorders (3 with

systemic lupus erythematosus and 1 with Behcet’s disease). In one

study, a majority of those with palindromic rheumatism also had anti-

citrullinated peptide/protein antibodies (ACPA), a serologic finding that is

common in RA. In another study, ACPA were positive in 83 percent of

patients who progressed to definite RA. Use of antimalarial drugs may

reduce the risk of progression to RA. One retrospective study of 113

such patients found that those who received antimalarials were 20

percent less likely to develop a chronic rheumatic disease”.

There is a lack of evidence to support the use of viscosupplementation for

the treatment of palindromic rheumatism.

Devulder (1998) noted that millions of patients with chronic sciatica are

still treated with epidural corticosteroids. The efficacy of epidural

corticosteroids remains questionable, especially in the chronic failed back

surgery syndrome (CFBSS). The affected nerve root sleeve(s) are

localized with the help of fluoroscopy and contrast dye. Local anesthetic

diluted in 1,500 U hyaluronidase and 40 mg methylprednisolone is

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

39/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

injected. Twenty patients with CFBSS, a small retrospective pilot study

group, were treated. The success rate was evaluated using a verbal pain

rating scale, 1 month and 3 months after the last injection. Initially, 12

patients obtained very good pain relief, sustained for greater than 3

months in 11 patients. In 1 patient, pain returned after 1 month or longer.

No complications were observed. The authors concluded that this

technique was worthwhile for patients with CFBSS and where epidural

fibrosis is suspected to be the pain origin. (This was a small uncontrolled

study; its findings were confounded by the combination use of

hyaluronidase and methylprednisolone).

In an open, non-blinded, randomized study, Devulder et al (1999)

evaluated outcome in patients with FBSS treated with nerve root sleeve

injections. A total of 60 patients with documented fibrosis in fewer than 3

nerve roots were included in this study. After random selection, 20

patients were injected with 1 ml bupivacaine 0.5 % combined with 1,500

units hyaluronidase and 1 ml saline per nerve root sleeve (group A),

another 20 were treated with 1 ml bupivacaine 0.5 % combined with 40

mg methylprednisolone solution (Depo Medrol) per nerve root (group B),

and a third group was treated with bupivacaine 0.5 % combined with

1,500 units hyaluronidase and 40 mg methylprednisolone solution (group

C). The volume of each injection was 2 ml. The injections were given

twice at an interval of 1 week. The patients were evaluated on a verbal

pain rating scale 1, 3, and 6 months after the second injection. The

Kruskal-Wallis test was used to detect statistically significant differences

among the 3 groups, and the analysis was refined with the Friedman

test. Overall, although injections induced analgesia at 1 month, these

effects were reduced at 3- and 6-month follow-ups. No statistical

differences were found between the 3 treatment groups (after 1 month, p

= 0.71; after 3 months, p = 0.69; after 6 months, p = 0.66). The Friedman

test showed a significant decrease in treatment score as a function of

time in groups B and C (p = 0.015) but not in group A (p = 0.074).

Corticosteroids seem responsible for the last phenomenon. (Again, the

findings were confounded by the combination use of hyaluronidase and

bupivacaine and/or methylprednisolone).

In a prospective, randomized, double-blind study, Ridenour et al (2001)

determined the anesthetic efficacy of a buffered lidocaine with

epinephrine solution compared to a combination buffered lidocaine with

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

40/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

epinephrine plus hyaluronidase solution in inferior alveolar nerve blocks.

A total of 30 subjects randomly received an inferior alveolar nerve block

using 1 of the 2 solutions at 2 separate appointments using a repeated-

measures design. Mandibular anterior and posterior teeth were blindly

pulp tested at 4-min cycles for 60 mins post-injection. No response from

the subject to the maximum output (80 reading) of the pulp tester was

used as the criterion for pulpal anesthesia. Anesthesia was considered

successful when 2 consecutive readings of 80 were obtained. A post-

operative survey was used to measure pain and trismus. The results

demonstrated 100 % of the subjects had profound lip numbness with both

solutions for inferior alveolar nerve blocks. The anesthetic success rates

for individual teeth ranged from 20 to 80 %. There were no significant

differences (p > 0.05) between the 2 solutions. However, the combination

lidocaine/hyaluronidase solution resulted in a significant increase in post-

operative pain and trismus. It was concluded that adding hyaluronidase

to a buffered lidocaine solution with epinephrine did not statistically

increase the incidence of pulpal anesthesia in inferior alveolar nerve

blocks and, because of its potential tissue-damaging effect, it should not

be added to local anesthetic solutions for inferior alveolar nerve blocks.

Also, the American College of Occupational and Environmental

Medicine’s clinical guideline on “Hand, wrist, and forearm disorders not

including carpal tunnel syndrome” (ACOEM, 2011) does not have a

recommendation on the instillation of hyaluronidase into the cystic

structure after aspiration because of insufficient evidence.

In a systematic review and meta-analysis, Leite and associates (2018)

evaluated the efficacy of viscosupplementation (HA) on the pain and

disability caused by hip OA, and determined the occurrence of AEs. Data

sources included PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, ClinicalTrials.gov

database, and specific journals up to March 2017; RCTs comparing HA

with any other intra-articular injection were selected for analysis. Data

were extracted according to Cochrane/Grades of Recommendation,

Assessment, Development, and Evaluation criteria; 2 authors extracted

data and assessed the risk of bias and quality of evidence. A random-

effects meta-analysis was conducted. A total of 8 RCTs were retrieved (n

= 807): 4 comparing HA to placebo; 3 to platelet-rich plasma (PRP); 3 to

methylprednisolone; and 1 to mepivacaine; some RCTs had 3 arms.

There was very low evidence that HA is not superior to placebo for pain at

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

41/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

3 months (standardized mean difference [SMD] = -0.06; 95 % CI: -0.38 to

0.25; p = 0.69), and high evidence that it is not superior in AEs (risk ratio

[RR] = 1.21; 95 % CI: 0.79 to 1.86; p = 0.38). There is low evidence that

HA is not superior to PRP for pain at 1 month. There is very low evidence

that HA is not superior to PRP for pain at 6 and 12 months (MD in VAS [in

cm]: -0.05 [95 % CI: -0.81 to 0.71], 1.0 [95 % CI: -1.5 to 3.50], and 0.81

[95 % CI: -1.11 to 2.73], respectively). There is high evidence that HA is

no different from methylprednisolone for pain at 1 month (SMD = 0.02; 95

% CI: -0.18 to 0.22; p = 0.85). There is low evidence that HA is no

different from methylprednisolone for Outcome Measures in Rheumatoid

Arthritis Clinical Trials-Osteoarthritis Research Society International

Responders Index at 1 month (RR = 0.44; 95 % CI: 0.10 to 1.95; p =

0.28). There is high evidence that HA is no different from

methylprednisolone for AEs (RR = 1.21; 95 % CI: 0.79 to 1.87; p = 0.38).

The authors concluded that they do not recommend

viscosupplementation for hip OA. Compared with placebo, data showed

scarce evidence of its efficacy up to 3 months, and suggested no

difference at 6 months. However, they stated that future RCTs could

present HA as an alternative to methylprednisolone for short-term

symptom relief.

In a systematic review and meta-analysis, De Lucia and associates

(2021) examined the long-term safety and effectiveness of single or 1 to 3

weekly injections of hylan G-F 20 at 1 year following the first injection for

knee OA. Searches were conducted in PubMed/Medline, Embase, and

CENTRAL and included relevant conference proceedings (January 1,

1995 to August 17, 2020); RCTs, non-randomized trials, and

observational studies examining 1-year safety and effectiveness of 1 to 3

weekly injections or single hylan G-F 20 injection for knee OA were

included. Primary outcomes were WOMAC pain, physical function, and

stiffness. Meta-analyses of RCTs and non-randomized studies were

conducted separately; and the search identified 24 eligible studies. Hylan

G-F 20, in the meta-analyses of RCTs, showed statistically significant

improvement in WOMAC pain (SMCC - 0.98, 95 % CI: - 1.50 to - 0.46),

physical function (SMCC - 1.05, 95 % CI: - 1.28 to - 0.83), and stiffness

(SMCC - 1.07, 95 % CI: -1.28 to -0.86). Improvement was also observed

for VAS pain, SF-36 MCS (mental component summary), and SF-36 PCS

(physical component summary). Analyses of non-randomized studies

showed similar effectiveness estimates. There were no significant

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

42/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

differences in effectiveness based on injection schedule, nor between

RCT and non-randomized studies. Rates of AEs were low for most types

of AEs. Hylan G-F 20 (either as single or 1 to 3 weekly injections)

showed improvement in 1-year effectiveness outcomes in comparison to

baseline and was generally well-tolerated. The authors concluded that

while further research will inform the medical field regarding

viscosupplementation therapeutic options for knee OA, these findings

showed that hylan G-F 20 at both frequencies/dosages were effective

and generally well-tolerated for long-term use.

The authors stated that this meta-analysis had several drawbacks. First,

as a consequence of the nature of OA treatment, most studies allowed

additional concomitant medication or additional courses of hylan G-F 20.

Studies that did not prohibit additional injections or concomitant

treatments may have confounded the results. The potential confounding

effects should be further studied, but such investigations were not

feasible given the limitations of the data. Second, some of the meta-

analyses had high levels of heterogeneity (I2 > 75 %), potentially caused

by variation in unmeasured patient characteristics. Third, attrition was

high in the majority of these studies, which reduced the generalizability of

these trials to all patients with knee OA who receive HA injections.

Fourth, non-English studies were excluded, which could have introduced

bias. Fifth, the focus of this meta-analysis was on a specific set of

outcomes, and other outcomes could produce a different pattern of

findings.

In a systematic review and meta-analysis, Wu and colleagues (2021)

compared the safety and effectiveness of intra-articular HA injection with

different molecular weights (MWs) for treating hip OA. These researchers

carried out a systematic literature search for relevant studies in 3

electronic databases, including PubMed, BMJ Journals, and Cochrane

Library, from inception to April 2020. Extracted outcomes included VAS

(1, 3, and 6 months), Lequesne index (3 and 6 months), and adverse

effects. HAs were classified into low-molecular-weight (LMW), moderate-

molecular-weight (MMW), high-molecular-weight (HMW), and ultra-high-

molecular-weight (UHMW) groups. Meta-analysis was carried out using

Review Manager 5.3. A total of 15 studies with 614 patients were

included. The meta-analysis showed that the HMW-HA group had the

best improvement in VAS and Lequesne index compared with other HA

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

43/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

groups for all the follow-up visits. Moreover, the HMW group

demonstrated significantly better improvement than the other groups in

VAS at 6-month follow-up and in Lequesne index at 3- and 6-month

follow-ups. Analysis for adverse effects revealed low rates of systemic

adverse effects (less than or equal to 0.6 %) in all groups and similar rate

of local adverse effects (around 10 %) among the groups except for

UHMW-HA group (37.5 %). The authors concluded that among different

MWs of HA in the treatment of hip OA, HMW-HA injection demonstrated

the best effectiveness for up to 6 months following treatment without

increased risk of adverse effects. Moreover, these researchers stated

that further studies with more comprehensive data and a higher level of

evidence are needed to prove these findings.

Amobarbital/Hyaluronic Acid Hydrogel for the Treatment of Post-

Traumatic Osteoarthritis Prevention

Quarterman and colleagues (2022) noted that a mitochondrial electron

transport chain member complex I inhibitor, amobarbital, can reduce

oxidative damage and chondrocyte death, eventually preventing post-

traumatic osteoarthritis (PTOA). Viscosupplementation using a cross-

linked HA hydrogel is currently used clinically for knee OA pain relief.

These researchers employed the HA hydrogel as a drug delivery vehicle

to improve the long-term effectiveness of amobarbital. They examined

the pharmaceutic stability of amobarbital when dispersed in a cross-

linked HA hydrogel formulated in proportions intended for clinical use.

These investigators validated a high-performance liquid chromatography

with an ultraviolet detector (HPLC-UV) method following International

Conference for Harmonization Q2(R1) guidelines to ensure its suitability

for amobarbital detection. The feasibility of this formulation's drug

delivery capability was proven by measuring the release, solubility, and

drug uniformity. The amobarbital/HA hydrogel showed comparable

amobarbital stability in different biological fluids compared to amobarbital

solution. Furthermore, the amobarbital/HA hydrogel imparted significantly

greater drug stability when stored at 70° C for 24 hours. The authors

confirmed the pharmaceutical stability of the amobarbital/HA hydrogel in

various conditions and biological fluids using a validated HPLC-UV

method. These researchers stated that these results provided essential

evidence in support of the use of this amobarbital/HA formulation in future

clinical trials for the treatment of PTOA.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

44/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Ankle Osteoarthritis

Lee and colleagues (2022) noted that various non-operative treatments

have been used to reduce pain and improve the QOL in patients with

ankle OA. In a prospective clinical trial, these researchers examined the

effectiveness and complications of hyaluronate injection using various

clinical scoring systems. This study included 37 patients with unilateral

ankle OA (grade 2 or 3 according to the Takakura classification) who did

not respond to previous pharmacological treatment. A total of 3 weekly

hyaluronate injections (2-ml Hyruan Plus) were administered. The

effectiveness of intra-articular hyaluronate injection was examined on the

basis of patient-reported foot and ankle clinical assessment at a mean

follow-up of 13.8 ± 8.3 (range of 6 to 33) months. Ankle Osteoarthritis

Scale scores for pain and disability, American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle

Society (AOFAS) ankle-hindfoot scores, and VAS for pain significantly

improved at the final follow-up compared to that before intra-articular

hyaluronate injection (p ≤ 0.05). When patients were dichotomized

according to age, sex, BMI, symptom duration, and Takakura

classification, all these factors were not related to clinical outcomes. The

authors concluded that the findings of this study suggested that 3 weekly

intra-articular hyaluronate injections could be carried out safely to reduce

pain and improve function without serious complications in patients with

early or intermediate-grade ankle OA when patients inadequately respond

to medication. Moreover, these researchers stated that larger controlled

studies are needed to clarify the effects of hyaluronate injection and

identify patients who could benefit most from hyaluronate injection. Level

of Evidence = III.

Combined Ozone Gas and Viscosupplementation for the Treatment

of Knee Osteoarthritis

Giombini et al (2016) compared short-term clinical outcomes between IA

injection of HA, oxygen ozone (O2O3), and the combination of both, in

patients affected by OA of the knee. A total of 70 patients (age of 45 to

75 years) with knee OA were randomized to IA injections of HA (n = 23),

or O2O3 (n = 23) or combined (n = 24) 1 per week for 5 consecutive

weeks. KOOS questionnaire and VAS, before treatment (pre) at the end

(post), and at 2 months after treatment ended (follow-up) were used as

outcome measures. Analysis showed a significant effect (p < 0.05) of the

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

45/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

conditions (pre, post and follow-up) in all parameters of the KOOS score

and a significant effect (p < 0.05) of groups (HA, O2O3 and combined) for

pain, symptoms, activities of daily living (ADL) and QOL. The combined

group scores were higher compared to the HA and O2O3 groups,

especially at follow-up. The authors concluded that the combination of

O2O3 and HA treatment led to a significantly better outcome especially at

2-month follow-up compared to HA and O2O3 given separately to

patients affected by OA of the knee. This was a relatively small study (n

= 24 in the combination group) with a short-term follow-up (2 months).

These preliminary findings need to be validated by well-designed

studies.

Duymus et al (2017) compared the effectiveness of treatment in 3 groups

of patients with knee OA given an IA injection of PRP, HA or ozone gas. A

total of 102 patients with mild-moderate and moderate knee OA who

presented at the polyclinic with at least a 1-year history of knee pain and

VAS score of greater than or equal to 4 were randomly assigned to 3

groups. Group 1 (PRP group) received IA injection of PRP × 2 doses,

Group 2 (HA group) received a single dose of HA, and Group 3 (Ozone

group) received ozone × 4 doses. Weight-bearing anteroposterior-lateral

and Merchant's radiographs of both knees were evaluated. WOMAC and

VAS scores were applied to all patients on first presentation and at 1, 3, 6

and 12 months. At the end of the 1st month after injection, significant

improvements were observed in all groups. In the 3rd month, the

improvements in WOMAC and VAS scores were similar in Groups 1 and

2, while those in Group 3 were lower (p < 0.001). At the 6th month, while

the clinical effectiveness of PRP and HA were similar and continued, the

clinical effect of ozone had disappeared (p < 0.001). At the end of the

12th month, PRP was determined to be both statistically and clinically

superior to HA (p < 0.001). The authors concluded that in the treatment

of mild-moderate knee OA, PRP was more successful than HA and ozone

injections, as the application alone was sufficient to provide at least 12

months of pain-free ADLs. This study did not address the use of

combined ozone and HA injection. Moreover, ozone therapy appeared

the least effective among the 3 therapies for knee OA.

Silva et al (2020) examined reticulated HA alone or associated with ozone

gas in the treatment of OA due to hip dysplasia in dogs. A total of 14

client-owned dogs were randomly assigned into 2 groups: Group 1 --

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

46/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

single IA injection of HA; Group 2 -- single IA infiltration injection of HA

associated with ozone gas. Each hip joint received an average of 0.75-ml

of reticulated HA US-guided. Ozone gas at a dose of 45 μg/ml was

incorporated into HA by insufflation. Dogs were evaluated for body

condition scoring, orthopedic examination and radiographic scores of the

hip joints, goniometric measurements of the hip joints, visual gait score,

and kinetic analysis. The evaluations were conducted immediately before

treatments (M0), and at days 30 (M1), 60 (M2), and 90 (M3) after

treatments. There were no significant differences in body mass and body

condition scoring (5-point scale) in each group in all evaluation moments.

The scores of orthopedic examination of the hip joints showed statistical

differences in each group between moments (M0 > M3), but differences

were not observed between groups. No statistical differences were found

for radiographic scores in each group between moments, but differences

were observed between groups immediately prior to treatments (G1 >

G2) and 90 (G1 > G2) after treatments. Goniometric measurements of

hip flexion and extension showed no significant differences in each group

between moments or between groups. No statistical differences between

groups were found concerning the lameness score. There were

significant differences for lameness score among moments in Group 1,

being M0 > M2 and M0 > M3, and Group 2 in which M0 > M1, M0 > M2,

and M0 > M3. The mean percentage of change of peak vertical force

(PVF) and vertical impulse (VI) between M3 and M0 in Group 1 was

almost null and in Group 2 was positive, being 31.1 ± 29.4 and 10.6 ±

25.4, respectively. The authors concluded that IA viscosupplementation

alone or associated with ozone gas allowed improvement of lameness

scores and orthopedic examination score. In Group 2 the association of

ozone gas had better results on kinetic analysis.

These researchers stated that despite randomization, radiographic scores

were higher in G1 than G2. On the other hand, the radiographic findings

did not influence the scores of orthopedic examination or lameness score;

thus, the absence of difference between 2 groups for other parameters

had suggested that a single application of ozone was unable to avoid

radiographic progression of OA and improvement in hip extension and

flexion. In a comparative study in human patients with knee OA, the

group that received IA injection of HA in combination with oxygen ozone

showed better outcome than HA or ozone administered separately,

however, the applications were once-weekly for 5 consecutive weeks.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

47/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

These investigators stated that further studies are needed to clarify,

including an ozone group, which may consider one of the limitations of

the present study. Because IA route in dogs generally requires sedation

and/or anesthesia, another option would be rectal insufflation, as used in

human patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Another drawback of this study

was the use of heterogeneous groups of dogs, which made difficult the

kinetic evaluation. Furthermore, the dogs were evaluated walking,

because of the disease the dog may be unable to trot or have difficult to

gait trial repetition, despite trotting gait be considered more sensitive than

walking gait to lameness detection. Therefore, to avoid these influences

future studies using dogs of the same breed and with the same hip

scoring should be considered.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Overview of the management of

osteoarthritis” (Deveza, 2020) does not mention ozone as a management

/ therapeutic option.

Combined Use of Viscosupplementation and Other Intra-Articular

Injectates

In a randomized double-blind study, Palmieri et al (2013) examined the

effect of a highly cross-linked hyaluronic acid (HA), Variofill, alone or in

combination with diclofenac sodium or sodium clodronate, for

management of bilateral knee osteoarthritis-related pain. A total of 62

patients with symptomatic bilateral medial tibiofemoral knee osteoarthritis

(Kellgren-Lawrence grade II and III) and pain in both knees

corresponding to a daily visual analog scale (VAS) score greater than or

equal to 30 in the month before the beginning of the study were included

in this investigation. Patients were divided into 3 groups: group 1, treated

with an injection of HA alone (66 mg) into each knee; group 2, treated

with an injection of HA (49.5 mg) plus diclofenac sodium (5 mg) into each

knee; group 3, treated with an injection of HA (49.5 mg) plus sodium

clodronate (5 mg) into each knee. Patients also underwent blood tests

for measurement of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive

protein (CRP) immediately before and at 6-month follow-up. Hyaluronic

acid alone and in combination with sodium clodronate or diclofenac

sodium produced a significant improvement in mean VAS pain score at 3

and 6-month follow-up. At 6-month follow-up, therapy with HA plus

sodium clodronate was the most beneficial in terms of percentage

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

48/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

improvement in VAS pain score. A significant improvement in ESR and

CRP was observed at 6-month follow-up in each treatment group. No

significant difference was observed when the percentage change from

baseline related to these parameters was compared among the groups.

No drop-out was observed in any group. No serious adverse events were

observed. The authors concluded that further studies are needed to

determine the effect of a therapy based on HA combined with diclofenac

sodium or sodium clodronate in larger cohorts of patients affected by

knee osteoarthritis and in longer-term follow-up.

In a randomized clinical trial, de Campos et al (2013) addressed 3

questions: Does the addition of triamcinolone to viscosupplementation (i)

improve 1st-week pain and function compared with

viscosupplementation alone, (ii) diminish adverse eﬀects of

viscosupplementation alone, and (iii) alter 6-month pain and function

of viscosupplementation alone? These researchers prospectively

enrolled 104 patients with knee osteoarthritis and randomized them to

receive either a single intra-articular injection (6 ml) of hylan GF-20

(Group viscosupplementation [Group VS]), or a single intra-articular

injection of hylan GF-20 (6 ml) and 1 ml (20 mg) of triamcinolone

hexacetonide (Group VS + T). VAS, WOMAC, and Lequesne

questionnaires were completed at baseline and at weeks 1, 4, 12, and

24. At week 1 the WOMAC and VAS scores were lower in Group VS + T,

compared with Group VS. There was no difference regarding the

adverse effects. At weeks 4, 12, and 24 there were no differences in the

groups. The authors concluded that the addition of triamcinolone

hexacetonide improved 1st-week symptom and functional scores of

viscosupplementation, but not beyond. It did not appear to increase the

likelihood of adverse effects. They also stated that one can speculate

that triamcinolone could positively affect the action in disease

progression; however, more studies are needed on this matter.

Migliore et al (2014) evaluated the mid-term pain-relief effect of an

ultrasound-guided injection of HA combined with a high concentration of

sorbitol (SynolisV-A (ANTI-OX-VS)) in patients suffering from

symptomatic hip osteoarthritis. Lequesne index, Health Assessment

Questionnaire (HAQ), pain reduction, Global Patient Assessment (GPA),

Global Medical Assessment (GMA) and reduction in monthly analgesic

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

49/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

consumption were assessed during the 12-month follow-up after the

injection. A total of 20 patients were enrolled in the study and received 1

IA US-guided injection of 2 syringes of ANTI-OX-VS into the target hip; 11

drop-out patients were registered, of whom 2 were for loss of efficacy at 6

months, 1 for loss of efficacy at 9 months and 8 patients for severe co-

morbidities. Mean scores of all clinical parameters evaluated at each

control visit were significantly different when compared with baseline

mean value. No systemic adverse events were observed. Even though

the sample size of this study was limited, the results suggested a durable

good efficacy of a 4-ml single injection of ANTI-OX-VS in hip OA, at least

for the patients who completed the study. The authors concluded that a

larger number of patients and an RCT are needed to confirm these data,

investigating also the predictive factors of clinical response to ANTI-OX-

VS.

In a pilot study, Conrozier et al (2016) provided data from daily practice

conditions of a viscosupplement made of a cross-linked high-molecular-

weight HA combined with mannitol in patients with knee osteoarthritis

(KOA). The data of 40 consecutive patients, 29 women and 11 men, who

were prospectively followed-up for 6 months, using a standardized

procedure, were retrospectively analyzed. All patients have received a

single intra-articular injection of HAnox-M-XL (4.4 ml), viscosupplement

made of a cross-linked HA (16 mg/ml) + mannitol (35 mg/ml), in the target

knee. The primary outcome was safety. The secondary end-points

included 3- and 6-month change in the WOMAC pain (0 to 50) and

WOMAC total (0 to 240) and patient's global assessment (PGA).

Patient's self-assessment of treatment efficacy (0 to 3) and analgesic

consumption were obtained at months 3 and 6. An intent-to-treat analysis

was performed. Mean (SD) age was 60.7 (13.9) years, and mean body

mass index (BMI) was 28.6 (5.0). Kellgren-Lawrence radiological grade

was I/II and III/IV in 13 and 27 of the subjects, respectively. The average

WOMAC pain and WOMAC total scores at baseline were 21.5 (9.8) and

89.9 (42.8), respectively; 39 patients completed the follow-up. HAnox-M-

XL was well-tolerated; 2 patients experienced knee pain after injection,

which resolved within 3 days. No treatment-related severe adverse event

was reported. Mean (SD) variations in WOMAC pain and WOMAC total

scores were -8.2 (8.9) and -38.4 (35.6), respectively, at month 6 (p =

0.001); PGA decreased from 5.5 (2.0) to 3.0 (2.2) (p = 0.006). Efficacy

was rated as good or very good in 76.9 % of the cases. Most of the

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

50/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

regular analgesics users decreased their consumption. The authors

concluded that treatment with 1 injection of 4.4-ml HAnox-M-XL was

effective to alleviate KOA symptoms over 6 months, without safety

concern. Moreover, they stated that controlled trials are needed to

confirm these pilot data.

Russo et al (2016) evaluated the rheological and biological properties of

different HA compositions in combination with platelet-rich plasma (PRP)

in order to identify (i) the viscoelastic features of the HA-PRP blends, (ii)

their biological eﬀect on osteoarthritic chondrocytes, and (iii) HA

formulations suitable for use in combination with PRP. HA/PRP blends

have been obtained mixing human PRP and 3 different HA at different

concentrations: (i) Sinovial, 0.8 % (SN); (ii) Sinovial Forte 1.6 % (SF); (iii)

Sinovial HL 3.2 % (HL); and (iv) Hyalubrix 1.5 % (HX). Combinations of

phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and the 4 HA types were used as

control. Rheological measurements were performed on an Anton

PaarMCR-302 rheometer. Amplitude sweep, frequency sweep and

rotational measurements were performed and viscoelastic properties

were evaluated. The rheological data were validated performing the tests

in presence of Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) up to ultra-physiological

concentration (7 %). Primary osteoarthritic chondrocytes were cultured

in-vitro with the HA and PRP blends in the culture medium for 1 week.

Cell viability, proliferation and glycosaminoglycan (GAG) content were

assessed. PRP addition to HA led to a decrease of viscoelastic shear

moduli and increase of the cross-over point, due to a pure dilution effect.

For viscosupplements with HA concentration below 1 % the viscoelasticity

is mostly lost. Results were validated also in presence of proteins, which

in synovial fluid were more abundant than HA. Chondrocytes proliferated

overtime in all different culture conditions. The proliferation rate was

higher in chondrocytes cultured in the media containing PRP compared to

the cultures with different HA alone. GAG content was significantly higher

in chondrocytes cultured in PRP and HL blend. The authors investigated

the rheological and biological properties of 4 different HA concentrations

when combined with PRP giving insights on viscoelastic and biological

properties of a promising approach for future OA therapy. The authors

stated that these findings demonstrated that PRP addition was not

detrimental to the viscosupplementation effect of HA. They noted that

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

51/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

viscosupplements containing low HA concentration are not indicated for

combination with PRP, as the viscoelastic properties are lost.

Vannabouathong et al. (2018) state that intra-articular injections are

commonly used to treat arthritis of the knee; however, the efficacy for

arthritis of the ankle is debatable. The authors conducted a systematic

literature review of observational and randomized clinical trials that

include treatments with corticosteroids (CS), hyaluronic acid (HA, platelet-

rich plasma (PRP) and mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). The authors

found 27 studies on 1085 patients that included mainly observational

studies (n=20). The only RCTs were those evaluating HA. Case series

demonstrated favorable results in terms of symptomatic relief with CS,

HA, PRP, and MSC injections; however, the effects of CS may only be

short term and the evidence on MSCs was limited to 1 study with 6 ankle

OA patients. Pooled results (3 RCTs, 109 patients) suggested significantly

improved Ankle Osteoarthritis Scale scores with HA over saline at 6

months, with a mean difference of 12.47 points (p= .03). The authors

concluded that the evidence from small trials favors HA and PRP

injections for the treatment of pain associated with ankle osteoarthritis;

however, the relative efficacy of all injectable therapies is far from

definitive and warrants further high-quality comparative trials.

Fluoroscopic Guidance for Knee Injections

Maricar, et al. (2013) undertook a systematic review to determine the

accuracy of intra-articular knee injection (IAKI) and whether this varied by

site, use of image-guidance, and experience of injectors, and whether

accuracy of injection, site, or use of image-guidance influenced outcomes

following IAKIs. Medline, Embase, AMED, CINAHL, Web of Knowledge,

Cochrane Central Registers for Controlled Trials up to Dec 2012 were

searched for studies that evaluated either accuracy of IAKIs or outcomes

related to accuracy, knee injection sites, or use of image-guidance.

Within-study and between-study analyses were performed. Data from 23

publications were included. Within-study analyses suggested IAKIs at the

superomedial patellar, medial midpatellar (MMP), superolateral patellar

(SLP) and lateral suprapatellar bursae sites were more accurate when

using image-guidance than when blinded (ranges of pooled risk

difference 0.09–0.19). Pooling data across studies suggested blinded

IAKIs at the SLP site were most accurate (87%) while MMP (64%) and

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

52/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

anterolateral joint line (ALJL) sites were (70%) least accurate. Overall

about one in five blinded IAKIs were inaccurate. The authors noted that

there was some evidence that experience of the injector was linked with

improved accuracy for blinded though not image-guided injections. Based

on a small number of studies, short but not longer-term outcomes for

ultrasound-guided were found to be superior to blinded IAKIs. The

authors concluded that image-guided IAKIs are modestly more accurate

than blinded IAKIs especially at the MMP and ALJL sites. Blinded

injections at SLP site had good accuracy especially if performed by

experienced injectors. The authors stated that further studies are required

to address the question whether accurate localization is linked with an

improved response.

Telikicherla and Kamath (2016) performed a study to know the correct

placement of needle inside the knee joint prior to viscosupplementation

by fluoroscopy using a contrast material. The accurate placement of

needle was evaluated in a prospective series of 94 consecutive injections

in patients without clinical knee effusion. All the injections were performed

by single orthopaedic surgeon using a 5 cm 21-gauge needle through

anterolateral, and lateral midpatellar portals. The needle placement in the

knee joint was confirmed with fluoroscopy using the contrast material.

The investigators reported that the accuracy rates through lateral

midpatellar and anterolateral portals were lower than expected rate

(100%). A total of 43 out of 47 injections were intra-articular, indicating

accuracy of 91.5% through lateral midpatellar portal, 41 out of 47

injections were intra-articular through anterolateral portal with accuracy of

87.4%. The investigators concluded that this study showed that the

accuracy of needle placement was higher through lateral midpatellar than

the anterolateral portal. A major limitation of this study is that it reported

results from a single surgeon, raising questions about the generalizability

of the findings. More importantly, the study examined the comparative

accuracy of different approaches, and did not examine whether clinical

outcomes were improved by use of arthrography.

Following Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction

In a double-blind, RCT, Di Martino and associates (2016) evaluated pain

control and functional recovery provided by a single injection of HA

performed the day after anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

53/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

The study enrolled 60 patients affected by primary, chronic, and

symptomatic ACL tear requiring surgical reconstruction. All patients were

treated with the same reconstructive technique and rehabilitation

protocol. Exclusion criteria were (i) concurrent articular lesion requiring

surgical treatment, (ii) axial mal-alignment in the index limb, and (iii)

functional limitation or pain in the contralateral knee. The day after

the procedure, the patients were randomized to receive a single injection

of 3 mL HA or 3 ml saline solution after surgical drains were removed. All

patients were evaluated at baseline and at 15, 30, 60, and 180 days and

12 months after surgery by use of the following tools: Short Form-36

Health Survey (SF-36), International Knee Documentation Committee

(IKDC) subjective score, VAS for pain, VAS for general health status, and

Tegner score. At each follow-up evaluation, the trans-patellar

circumference and active and passive ROM of both knees were

recorded. No severe adverse events (AEs) were documented after early

viscosupplementation. A significant improvement was documented in

both treatment groups. Significant differences were documented in the

trans-patellar circumference at 60 days and in active ROM at 30 days

post-operatively; patients who received HA had better values compared

with the placebo group (p = 0.022 and 0.027, respectively). No

statistically relevant intergroup differences were found in the clinical

scores. The authors concluded that he findings of this study documented

no AEs and had some positive findings in terms of active ROM recovery

and trans-patellar circumference reduction. However, the early post-

operative application of viscosupplementation did not lead to significant

improvement in clinical scores after ACL reconstruction.

Following Arthroscopic Knee Surgery / Partial Meniscectomy

Tripathy et al (2022) stated that pain, swelling and joint stiffness are the

major problems following arthroscopic ACLR surgery that restrict early

return to sports and athletic activities. The patients often receive

prolonged analgesic medications to control the inflammatory response

and resume the pre-injury activities. In a systematic review, these

researchers examined the safety and effectiveness of IA HA injection

following ACLR. They carried out a literature search of electronic

databases and a manual search of studies reporting clinical effectiveness

of IA HA following ACLR on November 1, 2020. The quality of the

methodology and risk of bias was assessed using the Cochrane

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

54/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Collaboration Risk of Bias Tool and Newcastle-Ottawa scale for RCT and

prospective cohort studies, respectively. Of 324 studies retrieved, 4

studies (3 RCTs and 1 prospective cohort study) were found to be

suitable for inclusion in this review. These studies had a low-to-moderate

risk of bias. There were 182 patients in the HA group and 121 patients in

the control group. The demographic characteristics of the patients were

similar in all studies. The pooled analysis of studies examining pain at

different follow-up periods (2-week, 4-6 weeks, 8-12 weeks) after ACLR

revealed no significant difference between the HA and control groups (p >

0.05). The knee swelling was significantly less in the HA group at 2

weeks (MD -7.85, 95 % CI: -15.03 to -0.68, p = 0.03, I2 = 0 %), but no

such difference was noted after 4-6 weeks and 8-12 weeks. The

functional outcome score was not significantly different between the

groups (SMD 0.00, 95 % CI: 0.38 to 0.38, p = 0.99, I2 = 0 %). The

authors concluded that although the individual study demonstrated a

short-term positive response regarding pain control and swelling

reduction, the pooled analysis did not find any clinical benefit of IA HA

injection following ACLR surgery. Level of Evidence = II.

In a RCT, Yoon et al (2022) examined the effectiveness of

viscosupplementation after arthroscopic partial meniscectomy. This trial

included 47 patients who underwent arthroscopic partial meniscectomy

between March 2020 and March 2021. Patients were randomized into 2

groups: a viscosupplementation group (n = 23) and a control group (n =

24). A single-dose IA HA injection was used as viscosupplementation.

The 100-mm VAS for pain assessment was measured at baseline and at

1 day, 2 weeks, 6 weeks, and 3 months post-surgery. The IKDC, Tegner,

Lysholm, and WOMAC scores and ROM of the knee were measured at

baseline, 2 weeks, 6 weeks, and 3 months. The 100-mm VAS score for

pain was significantly lower in the viscosupplementation group at 2 weeks

post-surgery (27.5 mm versus 40.7 mm, p = 0.047). ROM was

significantly greater in the viscosupplementation group than in the control

group at 2 weeks (131.5° versus 121.0°, p = 0.044) post-surgery. No

significant differences were observed in the IKDC or in the Tegner,

Lysholm, and WOMAC scores between the 2 groups. The authors

concluded that this prospective, randomized clinical trial showed that

viscosupplementation after arthroscopic partial meniscectomy

significantly reduced pain at 2 weeks post-surgery and improved ROM at

2 weeks post-surgery. Thus, viscosupplementation may provide some

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

55/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

benefits in terms of pain and functional recovery after arthroscopic

surgery. Moreover, these researchers stated that further investigation

with a larger number of samples is needed for a more definitive

conclusion. Level of Evidence = I.

The authors stated that this study had several drawbacks. First, the

surgeon was not blinded to the study. Second, even though bias was

eliminated, the amount of resected meniscus was difficult to quantify. As

the extent of meniscal resection is related to worsened clinical outcomes,

this factor may have affected the results of this clinical trial. Third, this

study included a small sample (n = 23 in the viscosupplementation

group). Third, medial meniscectomy tends to result in better outcomes

than lateral meniscectomy. These researchers stated that future studies

focusing on medial or lateral meniscectomy should be performed.

Mao et al (2023) noted that HA intra-articular injection after arthroscopic

knee surgery has been widely employed; however, its safety and

effectiveness remain controversial. In a systematic review, these

investigators examined analyze the safety and effectiveness of HA intra-

articular injection after arthroscopic knee surgery; and compared the

effectiveness of HA with different molecular weights. They carried out a

literature search in PubMed, Embase, Google scholar and the Cochrane

library from inception to September 16, 2022 for English-written articles to

identify RCTs that evaluated the clinical safety and/or effectiveness of HA

intra-articular injection after arthroscopic knee surgery. These

researchers meta-analyzed the outcomes of patients given intra-articular

HA injections post-operatively and control patients. They also examined

the influence of HA with different molecular weights. In every calculation,

sensitive analysis was conducted. The VAS for pain, WOMAC and AEs

were selected as the primary outcome measurements, while Lysholm,

IKDC and Tegner score were selected as the secondary outcome

measurements. Publication bias of every outcome was evaluated using

egger test. A total of 15 studies involving 951 knees were included and

12 of them were used to carry out the meta-analysis. The results showed

no significant difference between the HA group and control group

according to VAS, whether assessed at less (p = 0.90) or more than 6

months (p = 0.55). Furthermore, there were no statistical differences

between the HA group and control group according to subgroup analysis

(p = 0.77, 0.91 and 0.81 in anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

56/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

[ACLR], meniscectomy and overall groups, respectively). Compared to

control group, the overall effect of WOMAC score showed no significant

differences (p = 0.25), nor did in 2 subgroups (p = 0.37 and P = 0.22).

Outcomes measured by Lysholm (p = 0.13), IKDC (p = 0.86) and Tegner

(p = 0.42) scores showed no significant differences, either. The analysis

of the risk of AEs indicated no increase in HA groups (p = 0.06). These

investigators found no significant differences between high- and low-

molecular-weight HA at 6 (p = 0.96) or 12 months (p = 0.93) post-

operatively. Two studies failed to pass the sensitive analysis and the

reasons were discussed detailly and acceptable publication bias was

observed. The authors concluded that although HA injection after

arthroscopic knee surgery was safe, the available evidence did not

support its effectiveness in pain relief and functional recovery. Thus, the

use of HA injection after arthroscopic knee surgery is not recommended.

Following Meniscectomy

Filardo and colleagues (2016) stated that the management of the post-

operative period after knee arthroscopic surgery may be challenging

because surgical trauma deeply alters the joint microenvironment,

causing the release of several catabolic molecules and pro-inflammatory

factors that might slow down functional recovery. The possibility of using

HA to promote post-operative pain relief and expedite functional

improvement appears attractive, considering its biological properties. In a

RCT, these researchers evaluated the effects, in terms of pain control and

functional recovery, provided by a single HA injection performed at the

end of arthroscopic meniscectomy. A total of 90 patients, 18 to 55 years

of age, were included according to the following criteria: (i) chronic,

symptomatic meniscal tears requiring partial resection; (ii) a healthy

contralateral knee; (iii) no previous surgery on the index knee; and (iv)

no other concurrent articular lesions requiring surgical treatment

(e.g., cartilage or ligament injuries). Patients were randomized into 2

treatment groups: one underwent meniscectomy alone, whereas the

other also received an injection of 3 ml HA at the end of the procedure.

All patients were evaluated at baseline and then at 15, 30, 60, and 180

days using the following tools: IKDC subjective, KOOS, VAS for pain,

VAS for general health status, and Tegner scores. The trans-patellar

circumference and active and passive ROM were also recorded during

the follow-up evaluations. No major AEs were reported using HA post-

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

57/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

operatively. A statistically significant increase in all the clinical scores was

reported in both treatment groups, but no significant intergroup difference

was documented at any follow-up evaluation. No difference was

observed also in the objective measurements. The mean time to return

to full sports activity was not different between groups, and a comparable

satisfaction rate was recorded in both treatment groups. The authors

concluded that early post-operative viscosupplementation did not provide

significant clinical benefits after arthroscopic meniscectomy. They stated

that despite the lack of major AEs, the administration of a single HA

injection at the end of the surgical procedure is not a successful strategy

to provide either faster functional recovery or symptomatic improvement

after meniscectomy.

Hemophilic Arthropathy

de Rezende and co-workers (2015) examined if joint lavage,

viscosupplementation and triamcinolone improve joint pain, function and

quality of life in patients with severe hemophilic arthropathy. A total of 14

patients with knee and/or ankle hemophilic arthritis with and without

involvement of other joints underwent joint lavage and subsequent

injection of hylan G-F20 and triamcinolone in all affected joints. Patients

answered algo-functional questionnaires (Lequesne and WOMAC), VAS

for pain and SF-36 pre-operatively, and at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months post-

operatively; 16 knees, 15 ankles, 8 elbows and 1 shoulder were treated in

14 patients; 6 patients had musculoskeletal bleeding [ankle (n = 1), leg

muscle (n = 2) and knees (n = 4)] at 3 months affecting the results. Pain

did not improve significantly. Function improved (WOMAC, p = 0.02; and

Lequesne, p = 0.01). The physical component of SF-36 improved at all

time-points except at 3 months, with best results at 1-year follow-up

(baseline = 33.4; 1 month = 39.6; 3 months= 37.6; 6 months 39.6 and 1

year = 44.6; p < 0.001). The authors concluded that joint lavage followed

by injection of triamcinolone and hylan G-F20 improved function and

quality of life progressively up to 1 year, even in severe hemophilic

arthropathy. Level of Evidence = IV. This was a small (n = 14) case-

series study, and its findings were confounded by the combinational use

of joint lavage, viscosupplementation of HA and triamcinolone.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

58/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Intra-Articular Hyaluronic Acid Injection for the Treatment of Hip

Osteoarthritis

Letizia Mauro et al (2017) stated that OA is the most common joint

disorder in the elderly, causing significant pain which negatively affects

mobility and quality of life (QOL). In a prospective, open-label, single-

site, investigator-initiated study, these researchers evaluated the

effectiveness of US-guided intra-articular injections of Hyalubrix

combined with exercise therapy in the treatment of hip OA. A total of 40

patients were enrolled and received 3 US-guided injections of Hyalubrix,

45 days apart, combined with 3 sessions a week of physical therapy

(proprioceptive rehabilitation of the lower limbs; gait training; balance

training) up to a total of 30 sessions (10 weeks), starting from 1 week

after the 1st injection. The primary objective was to achieve a lasting

reduction in OA symptoms related to pain during activity. During the

course of the study the pain perceived by the patient during activity

dropped from a mean value of 6.94 cm to a mean value of 1.46 cm and

showed a statistically significant decrease from visit 1 compared to

baseline (p < 0.05), which was confirmed at all the subsequent time-

points. Significant improvements were also observed in the evaluation of

the secondary objectives: hip disability; OA-related pain at rest; daily

functioning and NSAIDs intake. The authors concluded that findings of

this study demonstrated a significant improvement in OA-related pain, hip

disability, and patient’s daily functioning as well as a reduction in NSAIDs

intake. Patients suffering from hip OA appeared to benefit from the

treatment with Hyalubrix injections plus exercise therapy. Moreover,

these investigators stated that a further controlled study is needed to

evaluate the synergic effect of the 2 combined treatments. The main

drawbacks of this study were its small sample size (n = 40) and the lack

of a control group; and the findings were confounded by the combined

use of HA injections and exercise therapy.

Clementi et al (2018) stated that viscosupplementation with HA is

increasingly used for the treatment of hip OA. These researchers

compared the efficacy of intra-articular injections of an ultra-high

molecular weight viscosupplement (UHMW-HA, Fermathron S) with a

medium molecular weight hyaluronan (MMW-HA, Hyalubrix 60) in hip

OA. A total of 54 patients with hip OA grade-3 on the Kellgren/Lawrence

scale were randomized. All infiltrations were performed under US

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

59/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

guidance. Evaluation was performed pre-operatively and at 1, 3, 6 and

12 months after infiltration. Patients were clinically evaluated using

Lequesne index, VAS and WOMAC score. A total of 50 patients,

including 27 in the MMW-HA group and 23 in the UHMW-HA group,

completed the follow-up. No significant difference was found between the

2 groups in terms of VAS, WOMAC or Lequesne index pre-operatively or

at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months after viscosupplementation. A stratified analysis

was performed to study the development over time of Lequesne index of

patients aged less than or equal to 55 years, greater than 55 and, less

than or equal to 70 years and greater than 70 years and Lequesne index

was different between the 3 age-stratified subgroups only in the MMW-HA

group. The subgroup of older patients showed a higher Lequesne index

than the subgroups of younger patients (p < 0.05). The authors

concluded that UHMW-HA was a safe and effective treatment for hip OA;

a single dose of UHMW-HA was as effective as 2 doses of MMW-HA

resulting in similar reductions of pain and disability. Moreover, these

researchers stated that future studies with a larger sample size are

needed to confirm the long-term efficacy of a single infiltration of the

UHMW-HA formulation.

The authors stated that this study had several drawbacks. First, these

investigators evaluated patients only with the Kellgren-Lawrence (KL)

scale for radiological assessment, while MRI would be better suited to

evaluate the degree and extent of the cartilage degeneration. In fact, a

new MRI hip OA grading system (SHOMRI) has recently been developed,

that is practical in image acquisition and scoring; this new grading system

showed good intra- and inter-reader reproducibility and found a significant

correlation with radiographic and clinical scores, which are the current

standards of reference for hip OA such as KL scale. Another drawback

was the lack of a placebo group. Placebo injections may cause an

important reduction in pain relief, especially during the 1st week.

Moreover the effect of the injections was only evaluated using subjective

clinical scores and no objective evaluation or imaging of the progress.

Sample size was too small to draw accurate conclusions from the

comparison between the 2 treatments (n = 27 and n = 23, respectively).

Furthermore, the follow-up period of 1 year did not allow an assessment

to be made of whether treatment with UHMW-HA determined a delay in

the need for total hip arthroplasty (THA).

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

60/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Letizia Mauro et al (2018) noted that although viscosupplementation has

been used in the past few years both for knee and hip OA, the number of

intra-articular injections and the interval between doses still remains an

undetermined subject. In an open-label, retrospective study , these

researchers examined the clinical and functional outcome in patients with

mild-moderate hip OA treated with a course of 1, 2 or 3 HA intra-articular

injections. A total of 96 patients were included: 19 patients received only

1 injection, 24 received 2 injections, and 44 received 3 injections. Age,

sex, VAS for pain and WOMAC score before each intra-articular injection,

number of intra-articular injections, reasons for interrupting the treatment,

AEs, time between HA injections, and number of patients who had a THA

were retrieved from the medical records of each patient. VAS and

WOMAC scores were obtained from all patients also at a mean follow-up

of 7 months after the last hip injection. All patients who received 1, 2 or 3

hip injections improved in VAS and WOMAC score; 3 intra-articular

injections provided a better outcome in terms of pain reduction compared

to 1 or 2 injections. The authors concluded that intra-articular HA

injections for mild-moderate hip OA were demonstrated to be effective in

reducing pain and improving function; a full course of 3 injections

provided the best result in pain control. The authors stated that

limitations of this study included the lack of a control group, and other

possible therapies used by the subjects during HA treatment that could

have influenced the outcomes, were not registered.

Brander et al (2019) noted that hip OA is difficult to treat. Steroid

injections reduce pain with short duration. With widespread adoption of

office-based, image-guided injections, HA is a potentially relevant

therapy. In a randomized, double-blind, multi-center, saline placebo-

controlled trial, these researchers compared the safety and effectiveness

of a single 6-ml image-guided injection of hylan G-F 20 to saline in painful

hip OA. A total of 357 patients were enrolled. Subjects were greater than

or equal to 35 years of age, with painful (WOMAC-A1: 5.0 to 8.0; numeric

rating scale [NRS]: 0 to 10) mild-to-moderate hip OA (KL grade II/III) and

minimal contralateral hip pain (WOMAC-A1 less than 4). Outcome

measures included "pain on walking" (WOMAC-A1 and -A), Patient

Global Self-Assessment (PTGA), WOMAC-A1 responder rate (+ greater

than or equal to 2 points on NRS), and AEs over 26 weeks. A total of 357

patients (hylan G-F 20 single: n = 182; saline: n = 175) were enrolled.

Both groups demonstrated significant pain improvement from baseline

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

61/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

over 26 weeks (p < 0.0001); saline-induced pain reduction was a

remarkable 35 %. WOMAC-A and PTGA scores also significantly

improved (p < 0.0001). No statistically significant difference was

observed between groups in WOMAC-A1 scores (hylan G-F 20

single:-2.19 ± 0.16; saline:-2.26 ± 0.17) or WOMAC-A1 responders (41 to

52 %). Treatment-related AE rates at target hip were similar (hylan G-F

20 single:23 patients [12.8 %]; saline:12 [7.0 %]). Post-hoc analysis

found, despite protocol requirements, many patients had psychological

(31 %) or potential neuropathic pain (27.5 %) conditions. The authors

concluded that a single 6-ml hylan G-F 20 injection or saline for painful

hip OA resulted in similar, statistically significant/clinically relevant pain

and function improvements up to 6 months following injection; no

differences between hylan G-F 20 and saline placebo were observed.

Furthermore, an UpToDate review on “Overview of the management of

osteoarthritis” (Deveza, 2020) states that “In addition to benefits, side

effect profile, and patient-specific impairments and preferences, costs of

interventions and local availability should also be considered. As an

example, intraarticular hyaluronic acid injections are associated with high

costs without clinically significant benefits over intraarticular placebo …

The benefit of intraarticular hyaluronic acid (HA) is also controversial for

knee and hip OA, and most evidence demonstrates only a small

superiority over intraarticular placebo”.

Intra-Articular Injection of an Hexadecylamide Derivative of

Hyaluronic Acid for the Treatment of Femoro-Acetabular Impingement

Ometti and colleagues (2020) stated that femoro-acetabular impingement

(FAI) is a condition that has been increasingly recognized as a source of

hip pain and a possible risk factor to early development of hip OA. To the

authors’ knowledge, the use of HA in the treatment of FAI has been

examined only by 2 studies, both using a high molecular weight HA.

These researchers examined the effectiveness of 2 weekly injections of

an hexadecylamide derivative of HA (HYADD4-G, Hymovis) for the

treatment of FAI. All patients received 2 weekly intra-articular injections

of Hymovis at baseline and after 7 days. Clinical and functional

assessments were carried out at baseline and was repeated after 1, 3, 6

and 12 months. Functional measures included VAS for pain, Harris Hip

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

62/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

score (HHS), Lequesne Index (LI), Tegner activity level scale (TALS) and

monthly consumption of NSAIDs. A total of 21 hips (19 patients, 2

bilateral cases) were treated. The variables VAS, HHS as well as

Lequesne improved significantly from T0 to T4 (at 12 months) with the

best improvement between T0 and T1. At the same time, a reduction in

NSAIDs monthly intake was registered. On the other hand, a significant

improvement in Tegner scale was not observed; no AEs were registered.

The authors concluded that 1 cycle of HYADD4-G could be a safe and

effective treatment in patients with FAI, showing significative results in

term of pain control as well as hip functionality and QOL up to 1 year.

However, these investigators stated that although this study showed

positive results, several drawbacks must be addressed. A larger sample

size would be preferred to avoid selection bias. Moreover, due to the lack

of a placebo arm, a potential placebo effect could not be ruled out.

However, since the effectiveness of an hexadecylamide derivate of HA in

FAI has never been examined, the objective of this trial was primarily to

examine its effects on FAI as well as to give a starting point for further

research.

Platelet-Rich Plasma Combined with Hyaluronic Acid for the

Treatment of Knee Osteoarthritis

Palco and colleagues (2021) noted that knee OA is one of the most

common joint diseases resulting in knee pain and reduction of mobility,

with a negative effect on QOL; IA injections of different formulations of

PRP are an increasingly common non-surgical treatment for knee OA.

Recently, in order to combine the anti-inflammatory effect of PRP and the

viscosupplementation effect of HA, a formulation of PRP combined with

hyaluronic acid (PRP + HA) has been proposed. In a retrospective study,

these researchers compared the effectiveness of plasma with high

concentration of platelets and leukocytes (L-PRP) with PRP + HA in

patients with mild-to-moderate (Kellgren-Lawrence scale II to III grade)

knee OA. Among the 51 patients included, 28 have been treated with L-

PRP, while 23 with PRP + HA. Evaluation at baseline (T0), after 3

months (T1) and 1 year (T2) were carried out. The outcome analyzed

were the Knee Society Score (KSS), VAS (at T0, T1, and T2) and the

KOOS (T0 and T2). These investigators examined change in mean

scores within and between groups among different time-points using

repeated measures ANCOVA. Although both treatments have been

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

63/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

effective in reducing VAS, the group treated with PRP + HA showed a

significantly lower KSS. The authors concluded that these findings

showed that the use of both treatments may aid in reducing pain in

patients with mild-to-moderate knee OA. Moreover, PRP + HA showed

better results in improving knee mobility and function. These researchers

stated that the findings of this study should be considered only

preliminary; further investigations (e.g., comparative studies with other

non-surgical options or studies that examine their effectiveness in severe

OA or in other degenerative joint diseases) are needed to determine the

clinical effectiveness of these formulations.

The authors stated that this study had several drawbacks. First, due to

the retrospective nature of the study, the baseline scores in examination

were derived from a single measurement on a non-random sample.

Hence, in this study, both design and analysis did not account for the

regression to the means; thus, the results should only be considered

preliminary. Second, these researchers treated patients who did not

respond to analgesic/anti-inflammatory therapy, and they interviewed

patients regarding their drugs consumption (to exclude routine

analgesic/anti-inflammatory drugs users). Nevertheless, these

investigators did not systematically collect concomitant treatment; thus,

they could not report the occasional consumption of analgesic/anti-

inflammatory drugs from the patients. Third, the absence of follow-up

after 1-year. At this time-point, the benefits of treatment were still

observable; however, these researchers were unable to determine how

much they persisted, or if the outcomes lasted longer in one group or in

the other. Fourth, due to the retrospective nature of the study, these

investigators did not have the possibility to compare the effects with

placebo, with saline, or especially with other combinations (e.g., PRP

only, or L-PRP + HA). Fifth, despite partly accounting for the possible

selection bias by adjusting for age, a proper analysis based on matching,

if feasible (e.g., prospective setting) may have been superior.

Shoulder Osteoarthritis

Kany and colleagues (2021) stated that OA of the shoulder in individuals

less than 50 years of age is rare; and treatment is delicate. Shoulder

replacement incurs frequent long-term risk of progression and a high

revision rate, making it unsuitable to young active patients. In a

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

64/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

retrospective, multi-center study, these researchers determined the

epidemiology of shoulder OA in under 50-year-old subjects and examined

the clinical results of the various therapeutic options. These researchers

hypothesized that well-conducted, non-operative treatment could allow

shoulder replacement to be postponed. The secondary hypothesis was

that anatomic total shoulder arthroplasty (TSA) is the treatment of choice

when other options fail. This trial included primary OA (POA) and post-

instability OA (PIOA) in patients aged less than or equal to 50years at

symptom onset. Exclusion criteria comprised post-traumatic OA,

rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and necrosis. A total of 266 patients (273

shoulders) were included from 13 shoulder surgery centers: 2 types of

non-operative treatment (28 by PRP and 88 by viscosupplementation), 73

arthroscopies, and 150 implantations (62 humeral hemi-arthroplasties

[HA], comprising 10 hemi-metal, 24 hemi-pyrocarbon and 28 hemi-

resurfacing; 77 anatomic total prostheses, and 11 reverse prostheses).

Minimum follow-up was 12 months for non-operative treatment and 24

months for arthroplasty (some patients having both). Endpoints

comprised Constant score, Subjective Shoulder Value (SSV) and number

of complications/revision procedures. Mean age at treatment was 43

years (range of 23 to 65 years), with 75 % male predominance.

Symptom onset was earlier in PIOA than in POA: 36 versus 39 years

(range of 20 to 50 years). PRP and viscosupplementation postponed

implantation by a mean 3.5 years in 86 % of cases, as did arthroscopy in

56 %; external rotation with elbow to side (ER1) restriction was the most

negative factor. At 74 months' follow-up for HA and 95 months for TSA,

mean Constant score was significantly lower for HA (56 versus 67; p =

0.004), with higher rates of complications (31 % versus 11 %) and implant

exchange (13 % versus 9 %). The authors concluded that PRP,

viscosupplementation and arthroscopy allow implantation to be

postponed until the shoulder becomes stiff and painful. In case of failure,

TSA was the most effective solution in the medium-term. Level of

evidence: IV

Temporomandibular Disorders

In a systematic review, Manfredini and colleagues (2010) examined the

clinical studies on the use of HA injections to treat temporomandibular

joint (TMJ) disorders performed over the last decade. The selected

papers were assessed according to a structured reading of articles

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

65/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

format, which provided that the study design was methodologically

evaluated in relation to 4 main issues: (i) population, (ii) intervention,

(iii) comparison, and (iv) outcome. A total of 19 papers were selected

for inclusion in the review, 12 dealt with the use of HA in TMJ disk

displacements and 7 dealt with inflammatory-degenerative disorders.

Only 9 groups of researchers were involved in the studies, and less than

50 % of the studies (8/19) were RCTs. All studies reported a decrease in

pain levels independently by the patients' disorder and by the adopted

injection protocol. Positive outcomes were maintained over the follow-up

period, which ranged between 15 days and 24 months. The superiority of

HA injections was shown only against placebo saline injections, but

outcomes are comparable with those achieved with corticosteroid

injections or oral appliances. The available literature seems to be

inconclusive as to the effectiveness of HA injections with respect to other

therapeutic modalities in treating TMJ disorders. The authors concluded

that studies with a better methodological design are needed to gain better

insight into this issue and to draw clinically useful information on the most

suitable protocols for each different TMJ disorder.

Goiato and colleagues (2016) examined if intra-articular injections of HA

are better than other drugs used in TMJ arthrocentesis, for the

improvement of temporo-mandibular disorder (TMD) symptoms. Two

independent reviewers performed an electronic search of the Medline and

Web of Science databases for relevant studies published in English up to

March 2016. The key words used included a combination of “hyaluronic

acid”, “viscosupplementation”, “intra-articular injections”, “corticosteroids”,

or “non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents” with “temporomandibular

disorder”. Selected studies were randomized clinical trials and

prospective or retrospective studies that primarily investigated the

application of HA injections compared to other intra-articular medications

for the treatment of TMD. The initial screening yielded 523 articles. After

evaluation of the titles and abstracts, 8 were selected. Full texts of these

articles were accessed and all fulfilled the inclusion criteria. The authors

concluded that intra-articular injections of HA are beneficial in improving

the pain and/or functional symptoms of TMDs. However, other drug

therapies, such as corticosteroid and NSAIDs injections, can be used with

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

66/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

satisfactory results. Moreover, they stated that well-designed clinical

studies are needed to identify an adequate protocol, the number of

sessions needed, and the appropriate molecular weight of HA for use.

Ferreira and colleagues (2018) performed a systematic review of the

viscosupplementation effectiveness with HA in the articular TMDs clinical

management. Electronic searches were performed in the following

databases: Medline (via PubMed), Scopus, Web of Science, Cochrane

Library, Embase, LILACS, BBO, SIGLE (System for Information on Grey

Literature in Europe), ClinicalTrials.gov, and the Brazilian Clinical Trials

Registry (ReBec). Only randomized clinical trials that evaluated the intra-

articular administration of HA or its derivatives in OA and/or anterior

displacement of the TMJ disc were included. The primary outcomes

evaluated were patients' self-report of pain and/or discomfort in the TMJ.

Each study was assessed for the risk of bias, using the Cochrane

collaboration's risk of bias tool. A total of 640 studies were obtained in

the electronic search. After the application of the eligibility criteria,

manual search, and duplicate removal, 21 articles were included; 5

articles classified their volunteers with internal derangements of the TMJ,

in 4 articles the treatment was directed to participants with disc

displacement with reduction and the other articles evaluated HA therapy

in OA. The protocols presented heterogeneity, varying in the form of

application, associated or not with arthrocentesis, number of applications,

molecular weight, dose and concentration; 9 studies presented high risk

of bias. The authors concluded that due to the heterogeneity and

methodological inconsistencies of the studies evaluated, it was not

possible to establish the efficacy of HA in articular TMDs.

In a randomized clinical trial, Castano-Joaqui and colleagues (2021)

examined the effects of HA as an adjunct to TMJ arthroscopy, relative to

standard TMJ arthroscopy, in Wilkes stage-III and stage-IV patients. A

total of 51 patients were allocated to a TMJ arthroscopy (n = 25) or a TMJ

arthroscopy plus HA (n = 26) group; VAS joint pain scores, maximum

mouth opening (MMO), and muscle pain were measured at baseline, and

at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months. Disk position on magnetic resonance imaging

(MRI) was examined at baseline and 12 months. Oral health-related QOL

(OHR-QOL) was assessed at baseline, and at 6 and 12 months. No

group differences were observed in clinical or radiographic

measurements (p ≥ 0.05). The results did not indicate any benefit of HA

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

67/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

as an adjuvant therapy to arthroscopy during follow-up months 3 to 12.

TMJ arthroscopy improved OHR-QOL at 6 and 12 months (Oral Health

Impact Profile-14 questionnaire scores of -14.59 and -14.27, 95 % CI:

17.55 to -11.63 and -17.27 to -11.27), respectively, as well as pain and

MMO, at all follow-up time-points (p < 0.001). The authors concluded that

beneficial effect of HA injection during TMJ arthroscopy after the 3-month

follow-up was not observed.

Treatment of First Metatarsophalangeal Osteoarthritis (Hallux

Rigidus)

In an observational, open-label, single-arm, pilot study, Galois et al (2022)

examined the safety and short-term effectiveness of a single IA injection

of mannitol-modified cross-linked HA (HANOX-M-XL) in patients with

painful 1st metatarsophalangeal joint OA (1stMTPJ-OA). The was a

prospective, multi-center trial, with a 3-month follow-up. Inclusion criteria

were patients with symptomatic 1st MTPJ-OA not relieved by analgesics

and/or NSAIDs and/or foot orthotic. All subjects received a single,

imaging-guided (IA injection of 1-ml of HANOX-M-XL in the 1st MTPJ.

The primary outcome was the change in pain between the date of

injection and month 3. The secondary outcomes were the patient

assessment of effectiveness, the decrease in pain killer use and the

influence of the radiographic score on the clinical effectiveness. A total of

65 subjects (72.3 % women, mean age of 60 years) were included in the

trial. Coughlin-Shurnas radiological grade was 1 in 28 patients, 2 in 29,

and 3 in 6. At baseline and month 3, the average pain (0 to 10) was 6.5 ±

1.8 and 2.8 ± 2.3, respectively. The change in pain score was highly

significant (-3.1 ± 2.9; p < 0.0001). At baseline there was no statistically

significant difference in pain between the radiological stages (p = 0.69).

At endpoint, the average pain score was 2.0 ± 1.9 in x-ray stage 1, 3.1 ±

2.3 in stage 2 and 3.3 ± 2.4 in stage 3 (p = 0.001). Mild-to-moderate AEs

were reported by 15 patients. All were a transient increase of the hallux

pain that occurred immediately and up to 6 hours after injection and

resolved in 1 to 7 days. The authors concluded that the findings of this

pilot study suggested that a single IA injection of HANOX-M-XL was safe

and mainly benefited patients with mild moderate 1st MTPJ-OA.

Moreover, these researchers stated that further RCTs with longer follow-

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

68/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

ups are needed to confirm these preliminary findings. The main

drawbacks of this study were its non-controlled design, and short-term

follow-up (3 months).

Viscoelastic Hydrogel Hymovis MO.RE. for the Treatment of Knee

Osteoarthritis

Bernetti and colleagues (2021) examined the safety and effectiveness of

a single IA injection (32 mg/4 ml) of a new HA derivative hydrogel

(Hymovis MO.RE.) for the treatment of adult regular sports players

affected by knee OA arising from overuse injuries. Patients were

prospectively enrolled if they regularly practiced sports and were

diagnosed with Kellgren-Lawrence grade I to III OA. Subjects received a

single Hymovis MO.RE. IA injection and were examined 30, 90, 180, and

360 days thereafter. The assessment involved measuring changes in

knee function, pain, the ADL, and QOL by using the KOOS, GAIT

analysis, the WOMAC scores for knee pain (WOMAC A) and function

(WOMAC C), and a VAS pain score. The study included 31 patients (23

women and 8 men, median age of 49 years). KOOS function sub-score,

as well as GAIT cadence and velocity, showed a statistically significant

increase at each time-point following injection (p < 0.0001). WOMAC,

KOOS pain, symptoms, ADL, and QOL scores also significantly improved

at all control visits. No severe AEs or treatment-related events were

detected. The authors concluded that a single Hymovis MO.RE. (32

mg/4 ml) IA injection provided a rapid, lasting, and safe response in

regular sports players affected by knee OA, possibly representing a

viable therapeutic option for this demanding patient subgroup. Moreover,

these researchers stated that further investigations including a control

group are needed to confirm these findings.

The authors stated that the principal drawback of this study was its small

sample size (n = 31) and the lack of a similar control group undergoing

the standard treatment. Moreover, only 3 patients had a grade III KL OA;

and a surface EMG was not used. Furthermore, no specific

questionnaires examining sports performance were administered to

patients; thus, allowing only for an indirect assessment of effects

specifically concerning sports activity. This calls for large, prospective,

cohort studies to further evaluate the effectiveness of this treatment in

regular sports players affected by knee OA. These investigators noted

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

69/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

that given the clinical characteristics and expectations of this particular

patient population, future studies are also needed to determine the

possible preventive role of IA Hymovis MO.RE. injection in reducing knee

injuries as well as its effectiveness when associated with physical

rehabilitation. These researchers stated that further investigations should

include GAIT assessment since it may provide objective confirmation of

subjectively-measured scores, and it has been shown to be predictive of

OA progression.

Viscosupplementation for Muscle Stiﬀness/Spastic Hemiparesis

Raghavan and colleagues (2016) noted that spasticity is a common

movement disorder after neurologic injury of cerebral and spinal origin

such as stroke, traumatic brain injury (TBI), brain tumor, cerebral palsy

(CP), spinal cord injury (SCI), and multiple sclerosis (MS). Upper limb

spasticity is associated with reduced functional independence and a 4-

fold increase in direct care costs during the 1st year post-stroke. The

prevalence of spasticity increases over time, contributing to further

disability long after the neurologic injury. Spasticity is challenging to treat

because the underlying neural and non-neural mechanisms and their

interactions are not fully understood. The neural mechanism underlying

spasticity is hyper-excitability of the stretch reflex due to disinhibition of

cortical influences on spinal cord circuitry, which results in velocity-

dependent increase in tonic stretch reflexes. However, many patients

with spasticity do not show any signs of hyperreflexia. Instead, muscle

stiffness, defined as increased resistance to passive movement, is the

commonest presenting sign in individuals with spasticity. Muscle stiffness

adds further insult to the underlying weakness. It both prevents full

passive movement (leading to abnormal posturing that could become

fixed over time) and makes active movement more difficult in patients

who are already weak from the neurologic injury. Non-neural peripheral

mechanisms are thought to cause muscle stiffness, although this has not

been shown conclusively. Current therapeutic options for spasticity

include oral medications such as benzodiazepines, baclofen, and

tizanidine that are central nervous system (CNS) depressants used to

suppress spinal hyper-excitability, and local injections of botulinum toxin

(BTX) used to suppress muscle over-activity. Whereas the oral

medications could produce cognitive deficits, fatigue, and muscle

weakness, BTX injections produce focal muscle weakness. Therefore, it

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

70/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

is necessary to balance the risks and benefits of treatment, which often

remains inadequate. Furthermore, these treatments do not directly

address muscle stiffness. The authors proposed the “Hyaluronan

Hypothesis”, which postulates that the accumulation of hyaluronan within

muscles promotes the development of muscle stiffness. They reported

that the enzyme hyaluronidase, which hydrolyzes hyaluronan, and is

available for off-label clinical use, increases both passive and active joint

movement, and reduces muscle stiffness in individuals with upper limb

spasticity. These results fill a critical gap in the understanding of muscle

stiffness, and present a promising treatment for a vexing and widespread

problem. In this study, a total of 20 patients with unilateral upper limb

spasticity received multiple intra-muscular injections of human

recombinant hyaluronidase with saline at a single visit. The safety and

efficacy of the injections, passive and active movement, and muscle

stiffness at 8 upper limb joints were assessed at 4 time-points: pre-

injection (T0), within 2 weeks (T1), within 4 to 6 weeks (T2), and within 3

to 5 months post-injection (T3). There were no clinically significant

adverse effects from the injections. Passive movement at all joints, and

active movement at most joints increased at T1, and persisted at T2 and

T3 for most joints. The modified Ashworth scores also declined

significantly over time post-injection. The authors concluded that

hyaluronidase injections offered a safe and potentially effective treatment

for muscle stiffness in neurologically impaired individuals. These

researchers stated that a blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled trial is

needed to control for a placebo response, the effects of confounding

variables such as number and location of injection sites, amount and

quality of therapy, and investigator bias in recording and analyzing

movement. This report did not address the effect of repeated drug

administration, although 15/20 patients did return for further injections.

The results of this study warrant replication by independent groups. They

noted that future studies should also directly examine the role of

hyaluronan and hyaluronidase in changing the mechanical properties of

spastic muscles using simultaneous joint angle, torque, and

electromyographic measurements to tease apart the effects on spasticity

versus stiffness, and examine the efficacy of treatment with hyaluronidase

on improvement in motor control, prevention of muscle contracture,

reduction in sensorimotor impairment, and increase in quality of life.

These investigators noted that this case series provided preliminary

evidence for the safety and potential efficacy of hyaluronidase injections

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

71/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

as a treatment for muscle stiffness that may enhance functional recovery

in the spastic upper limb, and may be applicable to other disorders

characterized by muscle stiffness.

Mayer (2018) presented 2 recent articles that propose novel interventions

for treating spastic hemiparesis by changing biological infrastructure. In

18 patients with unilateral spastic arm paralysis due to chronic cerebral

injury of greater than 5 years' duration, Zheng et al (2018) transferred the

C7 nerve from the non-paralyzed side to the side of the arm that was

paralyzed. Over a follow-up period of 12 months, they found greater

improvement in function and a reduction of spasticity compared to

rehabilitation alone. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging

(fMRI), they also found evidence for physiological connectivity between

the ipsilateral cerebral hemisphere and the paralyzed hand. In the 2nd

article, Raghavan et al (2016) examined the concept of stiffness, a

common symptom in patients with spastic hemiparesis, as a physical

change in the infrastructure of muscle. Raghavan's non-neural

hyaluronan hypothesis postulated that an accumulation of hyaluronan

within spastic muscles promotes the development of muscle stiffness in

patients with an upper motor neuron syndrome (UMNS). In a case series

of 20 patients with spastic hemiparesis, Raghavan et al reported that

upper limb intra-muscular injections of hyaluronidase increased passive

and active joint movement and reduced muscle stiffness. The author

concluded that interventions that change biological infra-structure in

UMNS is a paradigm on the horizon that bears watching.

References

The above policy is based on the following references:

1. Abate M, Pulcini D, Di Iorio A, Schiavone C. Viscosupplementation

with intra-articular hyaluronic acid for treatment of osteoarthritis

in the elderly. Curr Pharm Des. 2010;16(6):631-640.

2. Abate M, Schiavone C, Salini V. Hyaluronic acid in ankle

osteoarthritis: Why evidence of eﬃcacy is still lacking? Clin Exp

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

72/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Rheumatol. 2012;30(2):277-281.

3. Adams ME, Atkinson MH, Lussier AJ, et al. The role of

viscosupplementation with hylan G-F 20 (Synvisc) in the

treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee: A Canadian multicenter

trial comparing hylan G-F 20 alone, hylan G-F 20 with non-

steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and NSAIDs alone.

Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 1995;3(4):213-225.

4. Adams ME. An analysis of clinical studies of the use of

crosslinked hyaluronan, hylan, in the treatment of osteoarthritis.

J Rheumatol. 1993;39 (Suppl):16-18.

5. Adelaide Health Technology Assessment (AHTA). Intra-articular

viscosupplementation for treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee.

Systematic Reviews. Adelaide, SA: AHTA; 2003.

6. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). Managing

osteoarthritis: Helping the elderly maintain function and

mobility. AHRQ Research in Action [newsletter]. Issue 4. Rockville,

MD: AHRQ; May 2002.

7. Aggarwal A, Sempowski IP. Hyaluronic acid injections for knee

osteoarthritis. Systematic review of the literature. Can Fam

Physician. 2004;50:249-256.

8. Allan GM, Lebrun CM. Viscosupplementation (hyaluronic acid or

hylan): Cushioning the blow (to your wallet)? Tools for Practice.

Edmonton, AB: Alberta College of Family Physicians; May 13,

2013.

9. Altman R, Asch E, Bloch D, et al. Development of criteria for the

classiﬁcation and reporting of osteoarthritis. Classiﬁcation of

osteoarthritis of the knee. Diagnostic and Therapeutic Criteria

Committee of the American Rheumatism Association. Arthritis

Rheum. 1986;29(8):1039-1049.

10. American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS). Clinical

practice guideline on the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee

(non-arthroplasty). Rosemount, IL: AAOS; December 2008.

11. American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS). Treatment

of osteoarthritis of the knee. 2nd ed. Summary of

Recommendations. Rosemount, IL: AAOS; 2013.

12. American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons/American

Association of Neurological Surgeons/American College of

Rheumatology/American College of Physical Medicine and

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

73/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Rehabilitation. Clinical Guideline on Knee Pain. Rosemont, IL:

American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons; 1996.

13. American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine

(ACOEM). Knee disorders. In: Hegmann KT, editor(s).

Occupational medicine practice guidelines. Evaluation and

management of common health problems and functional

recovery in workers. 3rd ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: ACOEM; 2011.

14. American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine

(ACOEM). Hand, wrist, and forearm disorders not including

carpal tunnel syndrome. In: Hegmann KT, editor(s). Occupational

medicine practice guidelines. Evaluation and management of

common health problems and functional recovery in workers.

3rd ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: ACOEM; 2011.

15. American College of Rheumatology, Subcommittee on

Osteoarthritis Guidelines. Recommendations for the medical

management of osteoarthritis of the hip and knee: 2000

update. Arthritis Rheum. 2000;43(9):1905-1915.

16. Anika Therapeutics, Inc. Orthovisc high molecular weight

hyaluronan. Prescribing Information. Bedford, MA: Anika

Therapeutics; September 2016.

17. Anika Therapeutics. Monovisc. Prescribing Information. Bedford,

MA: Anika Therapeutics; July 2020.

18. Arrich J, Piribauer F, Mad P, et al. Intra-articular hyaluronic acid

for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee: Systematic review

and meta-analysis. CMAJ. 2005;127(8):1039-1043.

19. Bahadir C, Onal B, Dayan VY, Gürer N. Comparison of therapeutic

eﬀects of sodium hyaluronate and corticosteroid injections on

trapeziometacarpal joint osteoarthritis. Clin Rheumatol.

2009;28(5):529-533.

20. Balazs EA, Denlinger JL. Viscosupplementation: A new concept in

the treatment of osteoarthritis J Rheumatol Suppl. 1993;39:3-9.

21. Bannuru RR, Osani MC, Vaysbrot EE, et al. OARSI guidelines for

the non-surgical management of knee, hip, and polyarticular

osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2019;27(11):1578-1589.

22. Bellamy N, Campbell J, Robinson V, et al. Viscosupplementation

for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee. Cochrane

Database Syst Rev. 2005;(2):CD005321.

23. Bellamy N, Campbell J, Robinson V, et al. Viscosupplementation

for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee. Cochrane

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

74/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Database Syst Rev. 2006;(2):CD005321.

24. Benazzo F, Perticarini L, Padolino A, et al. A multi-centre, open

label, long-term follow-up study to evaluate the beneﬁts of a new

viscoelastic hydrogel (Hymovis®) in the treatment of knee

osteoarthritis. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2016;20(5):959-968.

25. Bernetti A, Agostini F, Alviti F, et al. New viscoelastic hydrogel

Hymovis MO.RE. Single intra-articular injection for the treatment

of knee osteoarthritis in sportsmen: Safety and eﬃcacy study

results. Front Pharmacol. 2021;12:673988.

26. Bioventus LLC. Durolane. Instructions for Use. Durham, NC;

Bioventus; November 2017.

27. Bioventus LLC. Durolane. Prescribing Information. Durham, NC:

Bioventus; November 2017.

28. Bioventus LLC. GelSyn-3. Prescribing Information. Durham, NC;

Bioventus; December 2017.

29. Bioventus LLC. Supartz (sodium hyaluronate). Prescribing

information. Durham, NC: Bioventus; revised April 2015.

30. Bioventus, LLC. Bioventus launches Supartz FX now with

expanded safety label for repeat injection cycles in knee

osteoarthritis. Press Release. Durham, NC: Bioventus; October

12, 2015.

31. Bioventus, LLC. Supartz FX (sodium hyaluronate). Prescribing

Information. Durham, NC: Bioventus; revised April 2015.

32. BlueCross BlueShield Association (BCBSA), Technology Evaluation

Center (TEC). Special report: Intra-articular hyaluronan for

osteoarthritis of the knee. TEC Assessment Program. Chicago, IL:

BCBSA; February 2005;19(17).

33. Brander V, Skrepnik N, Petrella RJ, et al. Evaluating the use of

intra-articular injections as a treatment for painful hip

osteoarthritis: A randomized, double-blind, multicenter, parallel-

group study comparing a single 6-mL injection of hylan G-F 20

with saline. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2019;27(1):59-70.

34. Caborn D, Rush J, Lanzer W, et al. A randomized, single-blind

comparison of the eﬃcacy and tolerability of hylan G-F 20 and

triamcinolone hexacetonide in patients with osteoarthritis of the

knee. J Rheumatol. 2004;31(2):333-343.

35. Carpenter B, Motley T. The role of viscosupplementation in the

ankle using hylan G-F 20. J Foot Ankle Surg. 2008;47(5):377-384.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

75/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

36. Carrabba M, Paresce E, Angeline M, et al. The safety and eﬃcacy

of diﬀerent dose schedules of hyaluronic acid in the treatment of

painful osteoarthritis of the knee with joint eﬀusions. Eur J

Rheumatol Inﬂamm. 1995;15(1):25-31.

37. Castano-Joaqui OG, Cano-Sanchez J, Campo-Trapero J, et al. TMJ

arthroscopy with hyaluronic acid: A 12-month randomized

clinical trial. Oral Dis. 2021;27(2):301-311.

38. Cleary M, Keating C, Poynton AR. Viscosupplementation in

lumbar facet joint arthropathy: A pilot study. J Spinal Disord

Tech. 2008;21(1):29-32.

39. Clementi D, D'Ambrosi R, Bertocco P, et al. Eﬃcacy of a single

intra-articular injection of ultra-high molecular weight hyaluronic

acid for hip osteoarthritis: A randomized controlled study. Eur J

Orthop Surg Traumatol. 2018;28(5):915-922.

40. Colorado Division of Workers' Compensation. Cumulative trauma

conditions medical treatment guidelines. Denver, CO: Colorado

Division of Workers' Compensation; September 16, 2010.

41. Conrozier T, Bozgan AM, Bossert M, et al. Standardized follow-up

of patients with symptomatic knee osteoarthritis treated with a

single intra-articular injection of a combination of cross-linked

hyaluronic acid and mannitol. Clin Med Insights Arthritis

Musculoskelet Disord. 2016;9:175-179.

42. Conrozier T, Couris CM, Mathieu P, et al. Safety, eﬃcacy and

predictive factors of eﬃcacy of a single intra-articular injection of

non-animal-stabilized-hyaluronic-acid in the hip joint: Results of

a standardized follow-up of patients treated for hip osteoarthritis

in daily practice. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg. 2009;129(6):843-848.

43. Conrozier T, Vignon E. Is there evidence to support the inclusion

of viscosupplementation in the treatment paradigm for patients

with hip osteoarthritis? Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2005;23(5):711-716.

44. Corrado EM, Peluso GF, Gigliotti S. The eﬀects of intra-articular

administration of hyaluronic acid on osteoarthritis of the knee: A

clinical study with immunological and biochemical evaluations.

Eur J Rheumatol Inﬂamm. 1995;15:47-56.

45. Creamer P. Intra-articular corticosteroid injections in

osteoarthritis; do they work and if so, how? Ann Rhemuatic Dis.

1997:56:634-636.

46. Dagenais P, Framarin A. Viscosupplementation for the treatment

of osteoarthrits of the knee. Summary. AETMIS 07-06. Montreal,

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

76/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

QC: Agence d'evaluation des technologies et des modes

d'intervention en sante (AETMIS); July 2007.

47. Dagenais S. Intra-articular hyaluronic acid

(viscosupplementation) for knee osteoarthritis. Issues in

Emerging Health Technologies Issue 94. Ottawa, ON: Canadian

Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH); 2006.

48. Dagenais S. Intra-articular hyaluronic acid

(viscosupplementation) for hip osteoarthritis. Issues in Emerging

Health Technologies Issue 98. Ottawa, ON: Canadian Agency for

Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH); 2007.

49. de Campos GC, Rezende MU, Pailo AF, et al. Adding

triamcinolone improves viscosupplementation: A randomized

clinical trial. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2013;471(2):613-620.

50. De Lucia O, Jerosch J, Yoon S, et al. One-year eﬃcacy and safety

of single or one to three weekly injections of hylan G-F 20 for

knee osteoarthritis: A systematic literature review and meta-

analysis. Clin Rheumatol. 2021;40(6):2133-2142.

51. de Rezende MU, Rosa TB, Pasqualin T, et al. Subjective results of

joint lavage and viscosupplementation in hemophilic

arthropathy. Acta Ortop Bras. 2015;23(3):162-166.

52. Deveza LA. Overview of the management of osteoarthritis.

UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed

October 2020.

53. Devulder J, Deene P, De Laat M, et al. Nerve root sleeve injections

in patients with failed back surgery syndrome: A comparison of

three solutions. Clin J Pain. 1999;15(2):132-135.

54. Devulder J. Transforaminal nerve root sleeve injection with

corticosteroids, hyaluronidase, and local anesthetic in the failed

back surgery syndrome. J Spinal Disord. 1998;11(2):151-154.

55. Di Martino A, Tentoni F, Di Matteo B, et al. Early

viscosupplementation after anterior cruciate ligament

reconstruction: A randomized controlled trial. Am J Sports Med.

2016;44(10):2572-2578.

56. Dougados M, Nguyen M, Listrat V, et al. High molecular weight

sodium hyaluronate (hyalectin) in osteoarthritis of the knee: A 1

year placebo-controlled trial. Osteoarthritis Cartilage.

1993;1(2):97-103.

57. Duymus TM, Mutlu S, Dernek B, et al. Choice of intra-articular

injection in treatment of knee osteoarthritis: Platelet-rich plasma,

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

77/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

hyaluronic acid or ozone options. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol

Arthrosc. 2017;25(2):485-492.

58. Espallargues M, Pons JM. Eﬃcacy and safety of

viscosupplementation with Hylan G-F 20 for the treatment of

knee osteoarthritis: A systematic review. Int J Technol Assess

Health Care. 2003;19(1):41-56.

59. Evanich JD, Evanich CJ, Wright MB, Rydlewicz JA. Eﬃcacy of

intraarticular hyaluronic acid injections in knee osteoarthritis.

Clin Orthop. 2001;(390):173-181.

60. Fernandez Lopez J-C, Ruano-Ravina A. Eﬃcacy and safety of

hyaluronic acid (technical report) [summary]. CT2005/06.

Santiago de Compostela, Spain: Galician Agency for Health

Technology Assessment (AVALIA-T); 2005.

61. Fernandez Lopez JC, Ruano-Ravina A. Eﬃcacy and safety of

intraarticular hyaluronic acid in the treatment of hip

osteoarthritis: A systematic review. Osteoarthritis Cartilage.

2006;14(12):1306-1311.

62. Ferreira N, Masterson D, Lopes de Lima R, et al. Eﬃcacy of

viscosupplementation with hyaluronic acid in

temporomandibular disorders: A systematic review. J

Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2018;46(11):1943-1952.

63. Ferring Pharmaceuticals Inc. Euﬂexxa (1% sodium hyaluronate).

Prescribing Information. 6309501103. Parsippany, NJ; revised July

2016.

64. Fidia Pharma USA Inc. Hymovis (hyaluronic acid) Prescribing

Information. Florham Park, NJ: Fida Pharma USA; revised June

2021.

65. Fidia Pharma USA, Inc. Hyalgan (sodium hyaluronate).

Prescribing information. Florham Park, NJ: Fidia Pharma USA;

revised August 2017.

66. Fidia Pharma USA, Inc. Triluron. Prescribing Information. Florham

Park, NJ: Fida Pharma; revised July 2019.

67. Filardo G, Di Matteo B, Tentoni F, et al. No eﬀects of early

viscosupplementation after arthroscopic partial meniscectomy: A

randomized controlled trial. Am J Sports Med. 2016;44(12):3119-

3125.

68. Finn BC, Young P, Laborde H, et al. Palindromic rheumatism.

Report of one case. Rev Med Chil. 2010;138(7):852-855.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

78/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

69. Formiguera SSE. Intra-articular hyaluronic acid in the treatment

of osteoarthritis of the knee: A short-term study. Eur J Rheumatol

Inﬂamm. 1995;15:33-38.

70. Fuchs S, Monikes R, Wohlmeiner A, Heyse T. Intra-articular

hyaluronic acid compared with corticoid injections for the

treatment of rhizarthrosis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage.

2006;14(1):82-88.

71. Galois L, Coillard J-Y, Porterie J, et al. Open-label pilot study of a

single intra-articular injection of mannitol-modiﬁed cross-linked

hyaluronic acid (HANOX-M-XL) for the treatment of the ﬁrst

metatarsophalangeal osteoarthritis (hallux rigidus): The REPAR

Trial. Clin Med Insights Arthritis Musculoskelet Disord.

2022;15:11795441211055882.

72. Genovese MC. Joint and soft-tissue injection. A useful adjuvant to

systemic and local treatment. Postgrad Med. 1998;103(2):125-

134.

73. Genzyme Biosurgery. Synvisc (Hylan G-F 20). Prescribing

Information. Ridgeﬁeld, NJ; revised May 2023.

74. Genzyme Biosurgery. Synvisc-One (Hylan G-F 20). Prescribing

Information. Ridgeﬁeld, NJ; revised May 2023.

75. Giombini G, Menotti F, Di Cesare A, et al. Comparison between

intrarticular injection of hyaluronic acid, oxygen ozone, and the

combination of both in the treatment of knee osteoarthrosis. J

Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2016;30(2):621-625.

76. Goiato MC, da Silva EV, de Medeiros RA, et al. Are intra-articular

injections of hyaluronic acid eﬀective for the treatment of

temporomandibular disorders? A systematic review. Int J Oral

Maxillofac Surg. 2016;45(12):1531-1537.

77. Graf J, Neusel E, Schneider E, et al. Intra-articular treatment with

hyaluronic acid in osteoarthritis of the knee joint: A controlled

clinical trial versus mucopolysaccharide polysulfuric acid ester.

Clin Exp Rheumatol. 1993;11(4):367-372.

78. Grogan KA, Chang TJ, Salk RS. Update on viscosupplementation

in the treatment of osteoarthritis of the foot and ankle. Clin

Podiatr Med Surg. 2009;26(2):199-204.

79. Hochberg MC, Altman RD, April KT, et al. American College of

Rheumatology 2012 recommendations for the use of

nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic therapies in osteoarthritis

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

79/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

of the hand, hip, and knee. Arthritis Care Res. 2012;64(4):465-

474.

80. Huskisson EC, Donnelly S. Hyaluronic acid in the treatment of

osteoarthritis of the knee. Rheumatology (Oxford).

1999;38(7):602-607.

81. Izquierdo R, Voloshin I, Edwards S, et al; American Academy of

Orthopedic Surgeons. Treatment of glenohumeral osteoarthritis.

J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2010;18(6):375-382.

82. Johnston C. AAOS: Hylan injections show equal eﬃcacy as

corticosteroid for arthritis of the knee [news]. Doctors Guide

Global Edition. Montreal, QC: P/S/L Group and Doctor's Guide

Publishing Limited; February 7, 2003.

83. Jordan KM, Arden NK, Doherty M, et al. EULAR recommendations

2003: An evidence based approach to the management of knee

osteoarthritis: report of a task force of the standing committee

for international clinical studies including therapeutic trials

(ESCISIT). Ann Rheum Dis. 2003;62:1145-1155.

84. Jüni P, Reichenbach S, Trelle S, et al; Swiss Viscosupplementation

Trial Group. Eﬃcacy and safety of intraarticular hylan or

hyaluronic acids for osteoarthritis of the knee: A randomized

controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2007;56(11):3610-3619.

85. Kany J, Benkalfate T, Favard L, et al; French Society for Shoulder,

Elbow (SOFEC). Osteoarthritis of the shoulder in under-50 year-

olds: A multicenter retrospective study of 273 shoulders by the

French Society for Shoulder and Elbow (SOFEC). Orthop

Traumatol Surg Res. 2021;107(1):102756.

86. Kirwan JR, Rankin E. Intra-articular therapy in osteoarthritis.

Baillieres Clin Rheumatol. 1997;11(4):769-794.

87. Kolasinski SL, Tuhina N, Hochberg MC, et al. 2019 American

College of Rheumatology/Arthritis Foundation Guidelines for the

management of osteoarthritis of the hand, hip, and knee.

Arthritis Rheumatol. 2020;72(2):220-233.

88. Kotz R, Kolarz G. Intra-articular hyaluronic acid: Duration of eﬀect

and results of repeated treatment cycles. Am J Orthop.

1999;28(11 suppl):5-7.

89. Lee G-W, Kwak W-K, Lee K-B. Eﬀects and safety of intra-articular

sodium hyaluronate injection for the treatment of ankle

osteoarthritis: A prospective clinical trial. J Foot Ankle Surg.

2022;61(2):345-349..

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

80/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

90. Leite VF, Daud Amadera JE, Buehler AM. Viscosupplementation

for hip osteoarthritis: A systematic review and meta-analysis of

the eﬃcacy on pain and disability, and the occurrence of adverse

events. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2018;99(3):574-583.

91. Letizia Mauro G, Sanﬁlippo A, Scaturro D. The eﬀectiveness of

intra-articular injections of Hyalubrix® combined with exercise

therapy in the treatment of hip osteoarthritis. Clin Cases Miner

Bone Metab. 2017;14(2):146-152.

92. Letizia Mauro G, Scaturro D, Sanﬁlippo A, Benedetti MG. Intra-

articular hyaluronic acid injections for hip osteoarthritis. J Biol

Regul Homeost Agents. 2018;32(5):1303-1309.

93. Lo GH, LaValley M, McAlindon T, Felson DT. Intra-articular

hyaluronic acid in treatment of knee osteoarthritis: A meta-

analysis. JAMA. 2003;290(23):3115-3121.

94. Lohmander LS, Dalen N, Englund G, H, et al. Intra-articular

hyaluronan injections in the treatment of osteoarthritis of the

knee: A randomised, double blind, placebo controlled

multicentre trial. Hyaluronan Multicentre Trial Group. Ann

Rheum Dis. 1996;55(7):424-431.

95. Lussier A, Cividino AA, McFarlane CA, et al. Viscosupplementation

with hylan for the treatment of osteoarthritis: Findings from

clinical practice in Canada. J Rheumatol. 1996;23(9):1579-1585.

96. Maheu E, Ayral X, Dougados M. A hyaluronan preparation (500-

730 kDa) in the treatment of osteoarthritis: A review of clinical

trials with Hyalgan. Int J Clin Pract. 2002;56(10):804-813.

97. Manfredini D, Piccotti F, Guarda-Nardini L. Hyaluronic acid in the

treatment of TMJ disorders: A systematic review of the literature.

Cranio. 2010;28(3):166-176.

98. Mao B, Pan Y, Zhang Z, et al. Eﬃcacy and safety of hyaluronic

acid intra-articular injection after arthroscopic knee surgery: A

systematic review and meta-analysis. Orthop Surg.

2023;15(1):16-27.

99. Maricar N, Parkes MJ, Callaghan MJ, et al. Where and how to

inject the knee—A systematic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum.

2013;43(2):195-203.

100. Mayer NH. New treatment approaches on the horizon for spastic

hemiparesis. PM R. 2018;10(9S2):S144-S150.

101. McAlindon TE, Bannuru RR, Sullivan MC, et al.

OARSI guidelines for the non-surgical management of knee

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

81/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2014;22(3):363-88.

102. McPoil TG, Martin RL, Cornwall MW, et al. Heel pain -- plantar

fasciitis: Clinical practice guidelines linked to the International

Classiﬁcation of Function, Disability, and Health from the

Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical Therapy

Association. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2008;38(4):A1-A18.

103. Medical Services Advisory Committee (MSAC). Intra-articular

viscosupplementation for treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee.

MSAC Application 1045. Canberra, ACT: MSAC; 2003.

104. Migliore A, Giovannangeli F, Bizzi E, et al. Viscosupplementation

in the management of ankle osteoarthritis: A review. Arch

Orthop Trauma Surg. 2011;131(1):139-147.

105. Migliore A, Massafra U, Bizzi E, et al. Duration of symptom relief

after intra-articular injection of hyaluronic acid combined with

sorbitol (anti-ox-vs) in symptomatic hip osteoarthritis. Int J

Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2014;27(2):245-252.

106. Migliore A, Tormenta S, Martin Martin LS, et al. The symptomatic

eﬀects of intra-articular administration of hylan G-F 20 on

osteoarthritis of the hip: Clinical data of 6 months follow-up. Clin

Rheumatol. 2006;25(3):389-393.

107. Migliore A, Tormenta S, Valente C, et al. Intra-articular treatment

with Hylan G-F 20 under ultrasound guidance in hip

osteoarthritis. Clinical results after 12 months follow-up.

Reumatismo. 2005;57(1):36-43.

108. Munteanu SE, Zammit GV, Menz HB, et al. Eﬀectiveness of intra-

articular hyaluronan (Synvisc, hylan G-F 20) for the treatment of

ﬁrst metatarsophalangeal joint osteoarthritis: A randomised

placebo-controlled trial. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011;70(10):1838-1841.

109. National Clinical Guideline Centre. Osteoarthritis. Care and

management in adults. Clinical Guideline CG 177. Methods,

evidence and recommendations. London, UK: National Institute

for Health and Care Excellence; February 2014.

110. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE).

Osteoarthritis. The Care and Management of Osteoarthritis in

Adults. NICE Clinical Guideline 59. London, UK: NICE; February

2008.

111. Neustadt DH. Intra-articular injections for osteoarthritis of the

knee. Cleve Clin J Med. 2006;73(10):897-911.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

82/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

112. Neustadt DH. Long-term eﬃcacy and safety of intra-articular

sodium hyaluronate (Hyalgan) in patients with osteoarthritis of

the knee. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2003;21(3):307-311.

113. Ometti M, Schipani D, Conte P, et al. The eﬃcacy of intra-articular

HYADD4-G injection in the treatment of femoroacetabular

impingement: Results at one year follow up. J Drug Assess.

2020;9(1):159-166.

114. Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care, Medical Advisory

Secretariat. Intra-articular viscosupplementation with hylan G-F

20 to treat osteoarthritis of the knee. Health Technology

Literature Review. Toronto, ON: Ontario Ministry of Health and

Long-Term Care; 2005:1-67.

115. OrthogenRx Inc. GenVisc 850. Prescribing Information.

Doylestown, PA: OrthogenRx; November 2019.

116. OrthogenRx, Inc. TriVisc (sodium hyaluronate). Full Prescribing

Information. Doylestown, PA: OrthogenRx; November 2019.

117. Pagnano M, Westrich G. Successful nonoperative management

of chronic osteoarthritis pain of the knee: Safety and eﬃcacy of

retreatment with intra-articular hyaluronans. Osteoarthritis

Cartilage. 2005;13(9):751-761.

118. Palco M, Fenga D, Basile GC, et al. Platelet-rich plasma combined

with hyaluronic acid versus leucocyte and platelet-rich plasma in

the conservative treatment of knee osteoarthritis. A

retrospective study. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021;57(3):232.

119. Palmieri B, Rottigni V, Iannitti T. Preliminary study of highly cross-

linked hyaluronic acid-based combination therapy for

management of knee osteoarthritis-related pain. Drug Des Devel

Ther. 2013;7:7-12.

120. Pleimann JH, Davis WH, Cohen BE, Anderson RB.

Viscosupplementation for the arthritic ankle. Foot Ankle Clin.

2002;7(3):489-494.

121. Quarterman JC, Naguib YW, Chakka JL, et al. HPLC-UV method

validation for amobarbital and pharmaceutical stability

evaluation when dispersed in a hyaluronic acid hydrogel: A new

concept for post-traumatic osteoarthritis prevention. J Pharm Sci.

2022;111(5):1379-1390.

122. Raghavan P, Lu Y, Mirchandani M, Stecco A. Human recombinant

hyaluronidase injections for upper limb muscle stiﬀness in

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

83/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

individuals with cerebral injury: A case series. EBioMedicine.

2016;9:306-313.

123. Ridenour S, Reader A, Beck M, Weaver J. Anesthetic eﬃcacy of a

combination of hyaluronidase and lidocaine with epinephrine in

inferior alveolar nerve blocks. Anesth Prog. 2001;48(1):9-15.

124. Rosenberg JN, Corticosteroid injections of joints and soft tissues.

eMedicine Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Topic 211.

Omaha, NE: eMedicine.com; updated September 14, 2001.

125. Roux C, Fontas E, Breuil V, et al. Injection of intra-articular

sodium hyaluronidate (Sinovial) into the carpometacarpal joint of

the thumb (CMC1) in osteoarthritis. A prospective evaluation of

eﬃcacy. Joint Bone Spine. 2007;74(4):368-372.

126. Russo F, D'Este M, Vadalà G, et al. Platelet rich plasma and

hyaluronic acid blend for the treatment of osteoarthritis:

Rheological and biological evaluation. PLoS One.

2016;11(6):e0157048.

127. Rutjes AW, Juni P, da Costa BR, et al. Viscosupplementation for

osteoarthritis of the knee: A systematic review and meta-

analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157(3):180-191.

128. Salini V, De Amicis D, Abate M, et al. Ultrasound-guided

hyaluronic acid injection in carpometacarpal osteoarthritis:

Short-term results. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol.

2009;22(2):455-460.

129. Salk R, Chang T, D'Costa W, et al. Viscosupplementation

(hyaluronans) in the treatment of ankle osteoarthritis. Clin

Podiatr Med Surg North Am. 2005;22(4):585-597, vii.

130. Salk RS, Chang TJ, D'Costa WF, et al. Sodium hyaluronate in the

treatment of osteoarthritis of the ankle: A controlled,

randomized, double-blind pilot study. J Bone Joint Surg Am.

2006;88(2):295-302.

131. Samson DJ, Grant MD, Ratko TA, et al. Treatment of primary and

secondary osteoarthritis of the knee. Evidence

Report/Technology Assessment No. 157. Rockville, MD: Agency

for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ); 2007.

132. Scali JJ. Intra-articular hyaluronic acid in the treatment of

osteoarthritis of the knee: A long term study. Eur J Rheumatol

Inﬂamm. 1995;15(1):57-62.

133. Scott D, Kowalczyk A. Osteoarthritis of the knee. In: BMJ Clinical

Evidence. London, UK: BMJ Publishing Group; October 2006.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

84/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

134. Shi Z, Guo C, Awad M. Hyaluronate for temporomandibular joint

disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(1):CD002970.

135. Silva JIS, Jr, Rahal SC, Santos IFC, et al. Use of reticulated

hyaluronic acid alone or associated with ozone gas in the

treatment of osteoarthritis due to hip dysplasia in dogs. Front

Vet Sci. 2020;7:265.

136. Singhal S, Zahid M. Palindromic rheumatism. J Indian Med Assoc.

2002;100(3):200-202.

137. Sowerby Centre for Health Informatics at Newcastle (SCHIN).

Prodigy Guidance - Osteoarthritis. Prodigy: Practical Support for

Clinical Governance. Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: SCHIN; revised

April 2003.

138. Stahl S, Karsh-Zafrir I, Ratzon N, Rosenberg N. Comparison of

intraarticular injection of depot corticosteroid and hyaluronic

acid for treatment of degenerative trapeziometacarpal joints. J

Clin Rheumatol. 2005;11(6):299-302.

139. Sun SF, Chou YJ, Hsu CW, Chen WL. Hyaluronic acid as a

treatment for ankle osteoarthritis. Curr Rev Musculoskelet Med.

2009;2(2):78-82.

140. Tamir E, Robinson D, Koren R, et al. Intra-articular hyaluronan

injections for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee: A

randomized, double blind, placebo controlled study. Clin Exp

Rheumatol. 2001;19(3):265-270.

141. Telikicherla M, Kamath SU. Accuracy of needle placement into

the intra-articular space of the knee in osteoarthritis patients for

viscosupplementation. J Clin Diagn Res. 2016;10(2):RC15-RC17.

142. Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc. Synojoynt. Prescribing

Information. North Wales, PA: Teva; March 2019.

143. Thomas JL, Christensen JC, Kravitz SR, et al; American College of

Foot and Ankle Surgeons heel pain committee. The diagnosis

and treatment of heel pain: A clinical practice guideline-revision

2010. J Foot Ankle Surg 2010;49(3 Suppl):S1-S19.

144. Tripathy SK, Varghese P, Behera H, et al. Intraarticular

viscosupplementation following arthroscopic anterior cruciate

ligament reconstruction: A systematic review. J Clin Orthop

Trauma. 2022;28:101847.

145. U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). TriViscTM (sodium

hyaluronate). Summary of Safety and Eﬀectiveness Data (SSED).

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

85/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

Premarket Approval Application (PMA) No. P160057. Silver

Spring, MD: FDA; November 13, 2017.

146. van Brakel RW, Eygendaal D. Intra-articular injection of

hyaluronic acid is not eﬀective for the treatment of post-

traumatic osteoarthritis of the elbow. Arthroscopy.

2006;22(11):1199-1203.

147. van den Bekerom MP, Lamme B, Sermon A, Mulier M. What is

the evidence for viscosupplementation in the treatment of

patients with hip osteoarthritis? Systematic review of the

literature. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg. 2008;128(8):815-823.

148. Vanelli R, Costa P, Rossi SM, Benazzo F. Eﬃcacy of intra-articular

polynucleotides in the treatment of knee osteoarthritis: A

randomized, double-blind clinical trial. Knee Surg Sports

Traumatol Arthrosc. 2010;18(7):901-907.

149. Vannabouathong C, Del Fabbro G, Sales B, et al. Intra-articular

injections in the treatment of symptoms from ankle arthritis: A

systematic review. Foot Ankle Int. 2018;39(10):1141-1150.

150. Venable PJW, Maini RN. Clinical features of rheumatoid arthritis.

UpToDate [online serial]. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; reviewed

November 2013.

151. Washington State Department of Labor and Industries, Oﬃce of

the Medical Director. Hyaluronic acid. Treatment of osteoarthritis

of the knee. Technology Assessment. Olympia, WA: Washington

State Department of Labor and Industries; August 1998.

152. Yoon KH, Wan WS, Kim Y-S, Park J-Y. The eﬃcacy of intraarticular

viscosupplementation after arthroscopic partial meniscectomy: A

randomized controlled trial. BMC Musculoskelet Disord.

2022;23(1):32.

153. Zhang W, Moskowitz RW, Nuki G, et al. OARSI recommendations

for the management of hip and knee osteoarthritis, Part II: OARSI

evidence-based, expert consensus guidelines. Osteoarthritis

Cartilage. 2008;16(2):137-162.

154. Zheng MX, Hua XY, Feng JT, et al. Trial of contralateral seventh

cervical nerve transfer for spastic arm paralysis. N Engl J Med.

2018;378(1):22-34.

155. Zimmer. Gel-One Cross-linked Hyaluronate. Prescribing

Information. 6LA40200. Warsaw, IN: Zimmer; issued May 20,

2011.

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

86/87

10/25/25, 12:31 PM

Viscosupplementation - Medical Clinical Policy Bulletins | Aetna

156. Zimmer, Inc. Visco-3. Prescribing Information. Warsaw, IN:

Zimmer; May 2017.

Copyright Aetna Inc. All rights reserved. Clinical Policy Bulletins are developed by Aetna to assist in administering plan benefits and

constitute neither offers of coverage nor medical advice. This Clinical Policy Bulletin contains only a partial, general description of plan or

program benefits and does not constitute a contract. Aetna does not provide health care services and, therefore, cannot guarantee any

results or outcomes. Participating providers are independent contractors in private practice and are neither employees nor agents of Aetna

or its affiliates. Treating providers are solely responsible for medical advice and treatment of members. This Clinical Policy Bulletin may be

updated and therefore is subject to change.

Copyright © 2001-2025 Aetna Inc.

Language services can be provided by calling the number on your member ID card. For additional language assistance: Español Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Pусский ةيبرعلا Kreyòl Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch ⽇本語 یسراف Other

Languages…

(http://www.aetna.com/individuals-families/contact-aetna/information-in-other-languages.html)

https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/100_199/0179.html?utm_source=chatgpt.com

87/87